## SOME TOPICS  IN TWO-PERSON GAMES

L-  S.  Shapley

## INTRODUCTION

This note reports on half-a-dozen loosely related excursions  into the  theory of finite,  two-person games,  both zero-sum and non-zero-sum. The connecting thread is a general predilection for results  that do not depend upon the  full  linear structure of the real numbers. Thus,  most of our theor­ ems and examples are  invariant under order-preserving transformations applied to  the payoff spaces,  while  a few  (in §  1)   are  invariant under the group of transformations  that commute with multiplication by - 1 .

We should make  it clear that we are not  interested  in  "ordinal" utility,  as  such,  but rather the ordinal properties  of  "cardinal" utility. The  former would require a conceptual reorientation which we do not wish to undertake here. Nevertheless,  the ordinalist may find useful  ideas  in this paper.

<!-- image -->

Rather than summarize the whole paper here,  we  shall merely take a sample;  for a more synoptic view the reader is  invited to  scan the  section headings. Consider first the matrix game shown in the margin. The  solution is  easily found as soon as we recognize  that  the game  is  symmetric  in the players. Indeed,  if we map  each player's  it^ 1  strategy into  the other's i+lst  (mod 4),  we merely reverse  the  signs  of the payoffs. It  follows  that  the  value is 0 and that there  is  a solution of the  form (a,b,a,b),  (b,a,b,a).  (See  § 1.) 0 1 2 -1 -1 0 1 - 2 2 -1 0 1 1 -2 - 1 0

Next,  consider the class of matrix games  in which the payoffs are ordered like those  in the matrix at  left  (next page). In all these games, player I's  third strategy is never playable,  although it  is not dominated  in the usual sense. To verify this,  observe  that  if the value of the  2-by-2

<!-- image -->

## SHAPLEY

subgame  in the upper left comer is  greater than "3" the third row is  dominated by a  linear combination of the  first two rows, while  if it is  less  than "7" the third column can be dropped, and then the third row. (See  §  3.)

<!-- image -->

Finally,  consider the non-zero-sum game with outcome matrix as  shown at right. Player I rates  the outcomes A &gt; B &gt; C;  player II rates  them B &gt; A &gt; C. If we apply the algorithm of "fictitious play" to  this game,  a strange  thing happens. Rather than con­ verging to the unique equilibrium point  (at which all probabilities are equal), the  sequence of mixed-strategy pairs  generated by the algorithm oscillates around it,  keeping a  finite distance away. (See  §  5.) A C B B A C C B A

The five main sections of this paper are essentially independent, both logically and topically. Our reason for combining them into a single paper  is  the hope  that they will appeal to a single audience. Much of this work has already appeared in short RAND Memoranda  [15],  and some of it has been cited in the published literature  [5],  [11]. In reworking this material, however,  we have added many new results.

## §  1. SYMMETRIC GAMES

## 1.1. Discussion

It  is  easy to  see  that a two-person  zero-sum game can be  symmetric in the players without having a skew-symmetric payoff matrix. "Matching Pennies"  is  a simple  example;  another is  shown at the right;  and another  is  given  in the  Introduction. The point  is,  of course, that an automorphism of the game  that permutes  the players  can simultaneously shuffle the  labels  of the pure  strategies. It would be  inter­ esting to know something about the abstract structure of such automorphisms.* 1 1 - 1 -1 0 -1 -1 1 1

<!-- image -->

As a first step,  we shall show that the matrix of a symmetric game can be decomposed into an array of square blocks  in such a way that  (a) each block has constant diagonals  (in one direction),  (b) the array as a whole  is skew-symmetric  in a certain sense,  and  (c) the  size of each block is a power

The narrow "skew-symmetric" definition is most often seen in the liter­ ature  (e.g.,  [19],  [10],  [7]). But Nash uses  the more general form in  [13]; see also  [19],  p.  166. *

<!-- image -->

of 2. This  is  illustrated at  left  for the  3-by-3 example given above.

The  "power of  2" property,  (c),  is  quite  interesting. It tells us,  for example,  that  the  6-by-6 game  illustrated below, which is obviously symmetric and has constant diagonals,  can nevertheless be decomposed  into  smaller blocks. The 4-by-4 and 8-by-8 analogues of this matrix,  on the other hand,  do not decompose.

<!-- image -->

## 1.2. The Main Theorem

Let A,  B, ... denote n-by-n game matrices  (n fixed throughout), and  let P,  Q,  R, ... denote permutation matrices of the same size. Primes will denote  transposition,  which is  equivalent to  inversion for permutation matrices. We define  the  following matrix properties:

equivalence:   A  =

B  &lt;------&gt;  A  = PBQ' for  some P, Q.

symmetry:

A  e 2  &lt;----- &gt;  A  = =  -A 1  .

conjugates:

P Q  &lt;------&gt;  P  = RQR' for some  R.

Certain subclasses of 2 , will also be of  interest:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These  subclasses  exhaust 2 , but are not disjoint. Indeed,  we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## SHAPLEY

PROOF. Given PQ = TRSTr and A = -PA'Q1,   we require B  = A such that B  = - RB'S'. As  it happens,,  B  = T'AP'TR serves  the purpose. Indeed, since P r   = QTS'R'T',  we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that Z(P,Q) depends only on PQ. If we define 2(P)  = 2(P,I), where I is  the  identity,  then Lemma 1 may be restated:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be shown that  the converse  is valid. Since two permutations are conjugate  if and only if their cyclic  factors have matching periods, there  is  thus a one-to-one correspondence between the classes 2(P) and the partitions of n. This  stronger result  is not used in what  follows.

LEMMA 2. If Q is  an odd power of P then 2(Q) 3 2 (P)-

There­

2 1 , 4 - 1 PROOF. Suppose A = -PA' . We must show that A e Z(P ) for all k. But A = -P(-PA1   )'  = PAP1;   hence A = PkAP'k = -  Pk+1A'P,k. fore A € Z(Pk+1,   Pk)   = Z(p2k+1).

THEOREM 1.1. Every symmetric game A e 2 is  equivalent to a game B satisfying B  = - RB' for some permutation R,  the order of which is  a power of 2.

PROOF. Let A e 2(P). The order of P can be represented in the k c k form c2  ,   with c odd. Then the order of P will be 2  . By Lemma 2, A e 2(PC). Thus Pc will serve as  the R of the theorem. Q.E.D.

## 1.3. Block Decomposition

The decomposition into blocks can now be described. By proper choice

of  B,  we  can give R  the  form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the periods A^  are  powers of 2. B  now breaks up  into  a square array of  A^-by-A^ blocks ant* the equation B  = - RB'  implies  (and is  implied by) the  structure set forth in the following theorem.  The proof is  straight­ forward.

THEOREM 1.2. Let A = min(A  , A ). The  block B N   l ~ i v' | j v has  constant diagonals,  in the  sense  that numbers .   . . , exist such that for ij in that block,*

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(If A^ A^,  then B breaks up  into identical  square sub-blocks of  size A . ) In the  symmetrically located block B the  same numbers appear;  we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular,  along the main diagonal of the array (\d = v ) , we have for h  = 1,  .  .  . , A.

COROLLARY 1. Indecomposable symmetric n-by-n games exist only for n a power of 2.

COROLLARY 2. Every symmetric game of odd size has a zero  in  its  payoff matrix.

## 1.4. Solutions

To solve a symmetric game we may  (a) replace  the B^v by their

T F ---------------

We write ij for the ordered pair (i,  j).

average values,  (b) solve the resulting skew-symmetric matrix,* and  (c) distribute the mixed-strategy probabilities  for each block equally among its constituent pure strategies.** Not every solution of the original can be obtained in this way,  however. In the game at the right,  for example,  (0,  2/3,  1/3,  0) is  a basic (extreme)  optimal strategy of each player. 1 -1 -1 1 2 -2 -2 2 2 -2 -2 2 4 -4 -4 4

## 1.5. Symmetric Nonzero-sum Games

There  is a direct extension to nonzero-sum games. Let us call the matrix pairs (A^,  A 2) and (B^,  B2) equivalent if,  for some P,  Q,  both A^  = PB-^Q1 and A 2  = PI^Q' · Let us call (A^,  A symmetric  if (A^, and (A^  A^) are  equivalent. Then the following counterpart to Theorem 1.1 can be established by essentially the same proof:

THEOREM 1.3. Every symmetric nonzero-sum games  (A-^,  A is  equivalent  to a game  of the form (B^,  B2) =  (RB^  RB^) for some permutation R  of order a power of 2.

The description of the block decomposition remains much as before, though the  "main diagonal" loses  some of  its  special significance. Corollary 1 remains valid,  but not Corollary 2.

## §  2. SOME THEOREMS ABOUT SADDLEPOINTS

## 2.1. A Condition for the Existence of a Saddlepoint

THEOREM 2.1. If A is the matrix of a zero-sum  twoperson game,  and if every 2-by-2 submatrix of A has  a saddlepoint,  then A has a saddlepoint.

PROOF. Let val[A]  = v. Let j be  the  index of a column having the minimum number, n, of entries  greater than v. Suppose t t &gt; 0;  then,  for

See Kaplansky  [10]  and Gale,  Kuhn,  and Tucker  [7]. *

** See  for example,  Gale,  Kuhn,  and Tucker  [8],  application  (e).

<!-- image -->

some i we have a ^   &gt; v. Since the value of the game  is  only v,  we must have a^ . .   ,   &lt; v for some j '   . But the column indexed by j  f has at  least 7 r entries  greater than v,  too many to be paired off against the 7 T -1 re­ maining entries &gt; v of the other column. Thus.,  for some i' we have ai'j'  ^ v - ai'j' Since  the  2-by-2 submatrix:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has no  saddlepoint,  the assumption t t &gt; 0 was  incorrect. Hence  there  is  a column with no entries greater than v. Similarly there  is  a row with no entries  less  than v. Q.E.D.

## 2.2. Detached Rows and Columns

The hypothesis of Theorem 2.1 actually imposes a very special t  h ture on the matrix A. Let us  say that  the p row of A is  detached strucif

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly,  the column is detached if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Detachment obviously implies  domination. For  2-by-2 matrices,  the existence of a detached row or column is equivalent to  the existence of a saddlepoint.

THEOREM 2.2. If every 2-by-2 submatrix of A has a saddlepoint,  then A has  a detached row or column.

PROOF. By  Theorem 2.1,  both A and A' (its  transpose) have saddlepoints. Hence  there is a column of A  with no  entries greater than val[A],  as well as a column of A (row of A 1)   with no  entries  less  than val[A']. If val[A] &lt; val[A'],  then these columns are distinct,  and the latter is a detached column. Similarly,  if val[A] &gt; val[A'],  there  is a

detached row. If val[A]  = val[A']   = v,  then there  is  either a detached row or column,  or a saddlepoint pq common to both A and A 1. In the  latter case,  a^j  = a ^   = v,  all i,j,  and we can use  the  fact that the submatrix obtained by deleting row p and column q has a saddlepoint to  show that either p or q is  detached,  depending on whether the value of the submatrix is &gt; v or &lt; v. Q.E.D.

## 2.3. A Generalization

Theorem 2.1 can be generalized,  after a fashion. Let us  say that a matrix is  "in general position"  if no two collinear entries are equal.

THEOREM 2.3. Let A be an m-by-n matrix in general position, and  let 2 &lt;  r &lt; m,  2 &lt; s &lt; n. If every r-by-s submatrix of  A has a  saddlepoint, then A has a saddlepo  int.

PROOF. It  suffices  to prove  the case where r  = m &gt;  2 and s  = n- 1 &gt;  2;  the  rest will follow by induction and symmetry. Let A4 denote \_\_\_ A  with the q column deleted. Let i j be the  location of the  saddlepoint q  q of A4 (which is unique,  since A is  in general position). If all of the jq's are distinct,  for q = 1,  ...,  n,  then every column of A  will  contain one of the points i j  . Since  each a.  . is  a column maximum,  one  of them Q Q 1  1 4 4 qJ q will be the maximum of the whole matrix. On the other hand,  it must also be the  (strict) minimum of its row in A4,   which contains at  least two entries. This  impossibility implies  that the Jq's are nQt aH  distinct. Let = j q f tThen it is apparent that the point iqjq  = itj  t is  a saddlepoint of A. Q.E.D.

At right we  illustrate what can happen if two collinear entries are  equal. Every 3-by-2 submatrix has a saddlepoint, but not the full matrix.

1 0 - 1

- 2 0 2

2 - 1 3

## §  3. ORDER MATRICES

## 3.1. Definitions. The  Saddle

By a line of a matrix we  shall mean either a row or a column. Two

numerical matrices of the same size will be called order equivalent if the elements of corresponding lines are ordered alike. An order matrix, ft,   is an equivalence class of order-equivalent numerical matrices. Abstractly,  it may be regarded as a partial ordering &lt; on the set I  ( f t ) of all  index C t pairs ij,   with the property that collinear points are always comparable, while noncollinear points are never comparable,  except as a result of trans­ itivity.

If K c I  ( f t ) is  a set of index  pairs,  we shall  write K - ^ for the set of first members,  ^ for the set of second members, and K  for K - ^   x In other words, is  the  smallest set  of rows, the smallest set of columns,  and K the  smallest submatrix,  that covers K. If K = K then K is rectangular.

A generalized saddle point (GSP)  of an order matrix ft is  a rectan­ gular set K c =   I  ( f t ) such that  (1)  for each i ^  K - ^ there  is  a p  e with pj  &gt; ij for all j e K9,   and  (2) for each j  ^  K9 there  is  a q e K9 C t  \_\_ z z with iq &lt;  ij for all i  e   K - .   . * (Note  the strict  inequalities.) A GSP that C t contains no other GSP is called a saddle.

THEOREM 3.1. Every order matrix has a unique saddle.

The proof consists  in showing that the  intersection of two GSP's  is a GSP. Let K  and L be two GSPs of  ft. Then certainly K 0 L f &lt; j &gt; ,  since K and L must both carry the optimal mixed strategies of  any numerical matrix  belonging to  ft.**  It will suffice to show  that for each i ^  K - ^ there  is  a p in K- ^   f t with pj  &gt; ij for  all j e  ^ H L2* But we can find a p 1 e  K - ^   with  that property,  since K is  a GSP. If p' £  L - ^ ,   then we can find a p" e L - ^ with p"j  &gt; p 1   j for all j  e   K 2  H If p" £ K^, then  p,M  e   K - j ^ can be  found bearing the same relation to p",  etc. The strict  inequalities  ensure  that the  sequence  terminates. That  is,  there is  a row in n L - ^ that majorizes row i on L2. Q.E.D.

The saddle of  ft  will be denoted by  S(ft). It  contains  everything

Compare  [5],  pp.  41-42.

** Bass  [1]  found a way to  prove K f l   L = f   ( | ) directly,  without reference to optimal strategies.

relevant to the solutions of the numerical games A belonging to  ft. In particular,  it contains Bohnenblust1s  "essential" submatrix* and the ShapleySnow "kernels."**

We may define a weak GSP by using nonstrict  inequalities &gt;,  &lt;. The a a intersection of two weak GSP's need not be a weak GSP. However,  as Bass has shown,  the  intersection of a weak GSP with the  saddle  is  a weak GSP.

## 3-2. Residuals

A one-element saddle  is an ordinary  (strict)  saddlepoint,  and  is easy to find,  even  in a very large matrix. Identification of the saddle  in general may be more tedious. The next theorem,  based on an ingenious  idea of Harlan Mills,  provides us a rapid method of generating points  in  the  saddle, and thereby substantially reduces  the search. (See also  §  3.5.)

LEMMA 1. (Mills) Let  Ct be an order matrix with at least two columns,  let pq be maximal with respect to &lt;,  and let  0tq be obtained from  Ct  by deleting a column q.*** Then S(Ctq)   c S(Ct).

PROOF. Write S for S(Ct) and Sq for  S1 x  (S2  - {q}). If q £ then Sq is  at once  seen to be a GSP of  Ctq . If q €  S2*   then p e  S^ by maximality. To  show that Sq is a GSP  of Ctq,   note that the row condition is  satisfied for Sq,   just as  for S,  while  the column condition fails only if column q was used  (in  Ct)  to minorize  some column outside S2* But this  is  impossible,  by the maximality of pq. Thus  Sq is  always  a GSP of  Ctq . Hence S(Ctq)   c Sq c S.

A similar lemma holds concerning the deletion of rows containing minimal elements.

The  following lemma  is  easily established;  we omit  the proof.

LEMMA 2. If  (B is  obtained from Ct  by deletion of a strictly majorized row or a strictly minorized column,

* See  [2],  p.  52;  also  [9],  p. 44.

** See  [17],  p.  32.

*** I.e.,  delete column q from  any  A e C t ,   then use order equivalence.

then S  ( ( B )   c  S(a).

Now consider a sequence of  nonvoid order matrices C f c ,  Ot^^, , . each obtained from the preceding by  deleting a column containing a maximal point,  or a row containing a minimal point,  or a strictly majorized row,  or a strictly minorized column. If (J is  an m-by-n matrix,  then ($(m+n  2) 1-by-l. The point so defined is  called a residual of  C f c . Let R ( O f c ) denote the set of all residuals of  C f c Our lemmas,  together with the  fact  that  the saddle  is  rectangular,  give us  the  following result;

THEOREM 3.2. R((i)  c R(a) £ s(®&gt;-

## 3.3. Examples

Let us  illustrate the residual concept.

- (a) In the order matrix of "Matching Pennies"  (at  left),  every entry is  either maximal or minimal. By the maximality of 11 we can strike out the first column,  then the first row goes by the minimality of 12,   and 22 is  a residual. The  three other sequences give us 11,  12,  and 21 as  residuals. Thus R ( C f c ) = R ( C f c ) = S ( C f c ) = I  ( C f c ) . 1 -1 -1 1
- (b)  More  generally,  let  C f c be a square matrix with a "detached" diagonal;  for  example  let ii be maximal with respect to &lt;,  for all i. C t Then for  each i,  we  can delete  all columns  except i by Lemma  1,  and then by row  deletions  obtain ii as  a residual. Hence R(d)  = S ( C f c )   = I ( &lt; 3 t )   ·
- (c)  We  first conjectured  [15b]  that deletions  of the  first type (Lemma  1) would always  suffice  to determine  the saddle. This was  disproved by Bass  [1] with the 4-by-4 example at right, which has no residuals  "of the first type" in the top row. But  if,  for example,  we  strike out  column 3,  then row 3 goes by  domination (Lemma  2),  and the resulting 3-by-3 game has  a detached diagonal making  11 a residual by  (b)  above. (All residuals  are circled.) 0 ® 2 © @ © 0 1 4 2 @ © 4 © @ © 0
- (d)  Thus,  a new counterexample  is needed to  show that R( C f c ) 4 S ( C f c ) is  possible. It  is  provided by the example  described in the Introduction,  which we reproduce here with residuals circled. As we shall see  later,  it  is no coincidence  that the residuals  avoid the  "unplayable" third row.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## 3.4. Minimax and Maximin Points

A minimax point of a numerical matrix is a column maximum of smallest value. A maximin point  is a row minimum of largest value. Since noncollinear comparisons are usually involved,  these terms are not well defined for order matrices. Nevertheless,  we have  the  following:

THEOREM 3.3. The minimax and maximin points of any numerical matrix A e ft are residuals of  Ct.

PROOF. Let pq be a minimax point of some A e f t . If A has more than one column,  then it will have a maximum in some column other than q, and the corresponding location  in  ft  will be maximal.  Delete this  column and pq is  still minimax. In  this way we may strip the matrix down to just the  single column q,  and then by row deletions  obtain pq as a residual. The proof for maximin points  is  similar.

Bass  [1] has  shown that every weak GSP contains a minimax point and a maximin point.

## 3.5An Algorithm

The  following method for determining the saddle was  suggested by Mills  (see  [1],  p.  3): Start with any submatrix known to be contained in the saddle  (for example,  a single residual). For h = 0,  1, given Kh c S(ft),  construct Kh+1 by  adjoining either  (a) a new row that  is maximal (i.e.,  not strictly majorized) in I-^ft)  * K2,   or  (b) a new column  that  is minimal in x  I2(ft). Then Kh+1 c S(ft). If neither  (a) nor  (b)  is possible,  then K* 1   = S(ft).

## 3.6. The Center

Let C-^(A) denote the set of "active" strategies for the first player in A,  i.e.,  those  that appear with positive probability in some  solu­ tion. Similarly,  C2(A) for the second player. Let C(A)  = C^(A)  x  C2(A). Then the  set

<!-- image -->

will be called the  center of &amp;.* The center is contained in the saddle. It is not  necessarily rectangular,  as may be seen from the example at the  right  (center shaded).

<!-- image -->

Example  (d)  of §  3.3 suggests that a point  which never  occurs  in  op­ timal play cannot be a residual,  i.e.,  that  R ( C f c )  c  C(Ct). This  is not always ® d &gt; © true. For example,  a matrix not  "in general position" can cause

·  3  (§)  (1) trouble,  as at  left. Another difficulty is more basic. In the matrix at  right,  columns 4 and 5 serve to establish that "10" &lt; "13" and "15" &lt; "18". These relations make row 1 unplayable,  despite the presence of residuals.*

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Accordingly,  we modify the order matrix concept for the sequences that define R(Ct) (see  § 3.2),  retaining noncollinear comparisons from  C t   whenever applicable. The new relations can destroy maximal or mini­ mal elements,  but not create them;  hence a restricted residual set R^(G) £ R(Ct) results. Our aim is to prove that R^(&amp;) £ C(Ct),  for ( j f c   in general position.

LEMMA 3. If pq e  C(A) then every neighborhood of A contains a B having a unique solution and such that pq  e   C(B).

PROOF. If pq e  C(A) then a "basic"  (extremal)  solution (x°,  y°) of  A exists with x° &gt; 0,  y° &gt; 0. We may  assume that val[A]  = v = ) =  0. By the Shapley-Snow theorem on basic solutions [17],  a nonsingular  submatrix A can be  found  for which (x°,  y°) is  an  "equalizer":

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Dots  indicate suppression of indices not appearing in  A;  1 is a vector of . 2 l1s.) Given  e &gt; 0,  define B = A -  (e/v)A  . If e  is sufficiently small, we can  invert B,  as  follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

\_

Proof: If row 1 is active,  then so  is row 2,  by an easy domination argu­ ment. Let d = (7-15,  1-10,  10-7,  15-1). Then ^ d ^   = 0,  and we verify that Z^a^jd^ &gt; 0 for each j. Hence,  any x  with  x - ^ ,   X 2 &gt; 0 can be improved.

Then B has an equalizer solution proportional to (x°,  y°)  + e(l, 1)  + 2 0(e  ). This  is  all-positive  for small e,  and hence unique.*

We now replace A by B in the original matrix. Since  the value and solution of B differ only slightly from those of A,  it  is  easy to perturb the rows and columns outside the submatrix so as  to make them irrele­ vant. The  full matrix now has a unique solution,  and p and q are  still active. Q.E.D.

LEMMA 4. Let A have at  least two columns,  let A^ result from  A by deleting  column q,  and let A(uu) result from  A  by adding u u to  the entry at pq. Then lim val[A(uu)]  = val[A^].

u u * 0 0

PROOF. Let  x° be optimal  in A^. Given e &gt; 0,  choose x such that | | x  -  x ° | |   &lt;  e and x^ &gt; 0. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v = val[A^] and a = max^.|a.jj|. Thus,  for u u large,  x guarantees the first player at  least v - ea in the game A(uu). Hence we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  following  lemmas  involve  the  "modified" order  matrix  concept,  in that &gt; and &gt; may include relations not derivable by  collinear comparison.

C t ( B

LEMMA 5. Let Ct be  in general position;  let pq be maximal in &gt;;  and let the  elements of  (B be  the  ele­ ct ments of  ft with column q  deleted.** Then C((B) £ C(ft).

* Another B,  suggested by 0.  Gross,  is given by

bu =   a i j   -   W u -   V j a i j   +  2 with (x,  y) all-positive but close to (x°,  y°).

**  Contrast (B with the  ft^ of Lemma 1.

PROOF. Take rs  e  C((B). Using Lemma 3 and the fact that Ct is  in general position,  find A e Ct such that  the associated Aq € (B has a unique solution (x*,  y*) with x* &gt; 0 and y* &gt; 0. Define the functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since f(x) is  polyhedral  (piecewise  linear)  and has a unique maximum at x*, there exists a &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all mixed-strategy vectors x. Similarly,  there exists f 3  &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all mixed-strategy vectors y with y^  = 0 .

Now let A(uu) be  obtained from  A by  adding u u  &gt; 0 to  the  element apq*  and  let (x(uu),  y(uu))  be any solution of A(uu). Then certainly val[A(uu)] &lt; f(x(uu)),  and we have by  (3.1)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma  4,  x(uu)  - »  x* as u u  - *  ®;  hence xr ( u u )   is  positive  for  large u u . The corresponding  statement  for yg  ( u u ) is  a bit harder to prove.

First we  observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a = max^ |a^ |  . Hence

Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where y '   ( u u ) is  like y(uu) except for y^(uu)  = 0 and y^  ( u u )   = yg (^)  + y^C^)-

Hence,  by  (3.2)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and  y '  ( uu) converges  to y*, by Lemma  4. Since yq(w)  " *  0*  we have y  (u j ) -  y* &gt; 0. Thus both r and s  are  active in A(uu) for large u u . But A(uu)  e C f c for all positive u u . Hence rs  e  C(Ct). Q.E.D.

LEMMA 6. If  ® is obtained from  Ct  by the deletion  (as in Lemma 5)  of a strictly majorized row or a strictly minorized column,  then C((B) £ C(Ct).

PROOF. A strictly dominated strategy can never be active.

THEOREM 3-4. If Ct is  in general position,  then R#(Ct )   c C(O).

PROOF. The theorem follows directly from Lemma 5  (and its  "row" counterpart),  Lemma 6,   and the definition of restricted residual.

## 3.7. The Antisaddle

We  close  this  part with a simple result concerning antisaddlepoints, i.e.,  saddlepoints of the negative matrix.

THEOREM 3.5. A strict antisaddlepoint of Ct   cannot be  in the center,  unless Ct is  1-by-l.

PROOF. Suppose S(-&lt;2)  = {pq} c C(&lt;$). Take A e Ct such that pq  e  C(A),  and  let A be the submatrix of A defined by C(A). Then A has  an equalizer solution,,  which solves -A as well. But -A has  a strict saddlepoint at pq,  and hence a unique,  pure-strategy solution. Therefore A is  1-by-l and pq is  a  saddlepoint of A as well as of -A,  strict  in both cases. This  is  possible only if A is  1-by-l. Q.E.D.

Weak antisaddlepoints are sometimes  found in the center ,   as  shown  (starred)  in the accompanying examples. The I B P smaller matrix has a saddlepoint;  the  larger one 0 2 (which  is  symmetric  in the  sense of §  1)   does not.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Similar reasoning can be used to establish the following more gener­ al result,  which applies  however only to numerical matrices:

THEOREM 3.6. If S(A) c C(-A) then S(A)  = C(-A).

## § 4. INSTANTANEOUS GAMES

## 4.1. Games of Almost-perfect  Information

There  is a class of games  of timing,  typified by the  so-called "noisy duels"  ([3],  p.  128-134;  also  [11],  Vol.  II),  in which the payoff depends  discontinuously upon the order in which certain actions occur,  but  is a continuous  function of the occurrence  times,  given the sequence of events. The  (finite)  set of actions available  to a player at any moment may depend on what has  gone before;  in any case  the players are  informed at all times of all all previous history. Except for the possibility of simultaneous action,  a solution in pure strategies would be  indicated. This  possibility,  however, not only makes mixed strategies necessary in general,  but even affects  the existence of a value. Indeed,  there are some surprisingly simple  indetermin­ ate  (valueless)  games of this  type,  perhaps worthy of a place beside  the examples  of Ville  ([5],  p.  115)  and of Sion and Wolfe  ([18]). (See below, Fig.  1.)

Simultaneity is not a serious  problem in the middle of the game, since  either player can avoid it at negligible cost by altering his  timing by a small random amount. But  this  tactic may not work at the beginning or end of the game,  since  the random displacement would be  in a fixed direction.

In order to  focus  on the problem of determinateness,  in games of timing with almost-perfect  information,  we  shall assume  that there  is a "critical  instant" at  the beginning of the game. The players will be motivated  (by the payoffs) to  take  some action either at t  = 0 or immediately thereafter. We  thereby reduce  the  infinite game  in extensive  form to an essentially finite,  "instan­ taneous" game,  whose payoffs  are defined by the values of the subgames  that result after the  first action,  or pair of simultaneous actions.

One of our results  (Theorem 4.4)  states  that an instantaneous game has  a value provided that the payoff  in the event of simultaneous actions lies between the payoffs  for the  same actions performed singly. Another result  (Theorem 4.5)  shows how to assign a formal value to  the game when the true value does not exist.

## 4.2. Some  Indeterminate Noisy Duels

Two gunfighters are crouched behind barriers,  where they can neither see nor be seen. If they stand up at the  same  instant,  we may assume that their chances are equal if they both shoot at once,  or  if they both hold their fire. If only one  fires,  that one wins. If one stands up without shooting,  and finds  the other still down,  then he can take control of the situation,  and eventually win. But  if the one under cover hears  the other stand up and fire,  then he can stand up and take control before his opponent has  time  to reload.

This  (with apologies  to  the real world!)  is an example of an inde­ terminate noisy duel. The critical moment is at the beginning of the time interval,  since  to wait an appreciable amount of time  is  definitely bad strategy. The situation at t  = 0 can be represented by the  following matrix:

|                   | Stand up shooting   | Stand up quiet   | ' . 1   |
|-------------------|---------------------|------------------|---------|
| Stand up shooting | 0                   | + 1              | -1      |
| Stand up quiet    | -1                  | 0                | + 1     |
| Wait -            | + 1                 | -1               | ®       |

Here "(g)"  is meant to  suggest "repeat"  or "replay," as  in a recursive game (see  §  4.4 below).

Let us  test  for a value. In the minorant game,  in which player I openly commits himself to a particular  (mixed)  strategy,  the outcome  (g)  is worth no more than - 1,  because player  II,  knowing the probable duration of the other's  "wait," will almost always  succeed in acting first. Setting (g)  = - 1 and  solving,  we  find that  the value  is - 1/9By symmetry,  the value of the majorant game  is +1/9. Hence the duel is  indeterminate.

<!-- image -->

An  even simpler  example is  shown  at right. The minorant  value  is zero;  the majorant value is 1/3.  Any matrix order-equivalent to this  one  (see  §  3)  also represents a game without a value,  if we interpret "(g)" as a number between 0 and 1 in determining order equivalence. 1 -1 -1 1 0 ®

The above can be viewed as a game on two unit squares,  with discon­ tinuities  along the diagonals  (Fig.  1).

Figure  1.

<!-- image -->

## 4.3. The General Case

Let M(cp) denote the following m+l-by-n+1 array:

<!-- image -->

Here c p is either a real number or the symbol  (5) . The game represented by M(  ( R )   ) is  said to be  instantaneous  if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This condition puts a premium on immediate action. Without it,  at  least one player would be willing to delay,  and other elements of the original game of timing  (from which we assume  the data in M(  ( § )   ) to have been drawn) would become significant  in the  selection and timing of the  first action. We  shall be concerned henceforth only with the  instantaneous case.

The minorant and majorant games have the matrices

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. Let their values be v^ and V 2 &gt; and their sets of optimal strategies X - ^ and X2 (for player I)  and and Y2 (for player II). Obviously,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If v- ^   &lt;  V 2 the game is  indeterminate; if  v^ = V2 the game  is  determinate and the optimal strategies  for the two players correspond  exactly to the elements  of X- ^ and Y2*   respectively.

THEOREM 4.1. A necessary and sufficient condition for the  instantaneous  game M(  ® ) to be determinate  is that X - ^  c X 2 and ^2  -  ^ V

PROOF. Necessity. Any strategy guaranteeing v^ to player I in will guarantee him at least as much in M^Therefore,  v^  = implies Xi c X2. Similarly,  Y2 &lt; =  Y^.

Sufficiency. Let X - ^  c Y2 Sz and suppose v^ &lt; V2* Take x e XxThen,  since x is  optimal  in M 2, we  have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence no j  = ( =   0 can be active  in M- ^ . Hence Y- ^ consists of the single strategy "wait." The same holds  for by inclusion,  and for X2 and X p by symmetry. Hence and M 2 have  saddlepoints at  "wait-wait," contra­ dicting  (4.1). Q.E.D.

is

THEOREM 4.2. A necessary condition for the  instantan­ eous  game M(  ( R )   ) to  be  determinate is that  "wait" unplayable  (i.e., not  active)  for at  least one player in at  least  one of M^,  M 2*

PROOF. Let v^ =  v 2 ' anc*   ta^e x e X^,  y e Y2Then x e X2 and y e Y^,  by Theorem 4.1,  and we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By  (4.1), XqYq  = 0. Since x and y may be chosen independently,  it follows that  either Xq vanishes  identically for x  e X^,  or Yq vanishes  identi­ cally for y e Y2* Q.E.D.

is

THEOREM 4.3. A sufficient condition for the  instantan­ eous  game M(  ( R )   ) to  be  determinate is that  "wait" unplayable for both players  in at  least one of M^, M 2*

PROOF. Under the hypothesis,  val[M(a)] is  independent of a.

The conditions  given so  far are somewhat  impractical,  since the values of the games M-^ ,   M 2 are at  least as  easy to  find as  the optimal strategies. The condition in the next theorem is  free  from this  drawback, and it also has  a simple heuristic  interpretation,  namely: if two actions occur simultaneously,  the result  is  intermediate  in value between the results of either action performed separately.

THEOREM 4.4. If  (4.1) holds,  and,if,  for all i = ) =   0 , j  + 0.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then M( (R)   ) is  determinate.

PROOF. Let i*,  i* be  such that a.*.n  = max a.n, an .* = min an . . i*0 . +0 10 Oj* j+Q Oj Let I  be the  set of i f 0 such that a^Q &gt; aQj*&gt;  and J the set of j  = | =   0 such that a^^  &lt; a^*Q* Then by  (4.1),  i* e  I and j*  e  J,  so  that neither I nor J nor their complements are empty. Take jeJ and iel.

If i f 0 then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by the definitions of I,  j*,  and J,  respectively. Applying the  "between­ ness" condition  (4.3)  twice,  we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus,  for every i £  I (including i  = 0),  a^.  &lt; a^*j holds  for all jej. Similarly,  for every jej,  a^.  &gt; a^j* holds  for all iel. This means  that Ixj is  a weak generalized saddlepoint of M(a)  (see  §  3.1). Hence val[M(a)] is  independent of a. Q.E.D.

## 4.4.

## A Way of Resolving the  Indeterminacy

One may wish to assign a formal value  to the  instantaneous  game M(  ( R )   ) when no true value exists. A way to do this perhaps  the only "fair" way is  to pursue  the analogy with stochastic or recursive games [16],  [6] ,   and attempt  to  solve  the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In effect,  we replace  the time continuum by a discrete,  well-ordered set of points,  making simultaneity after t  = 0 a significant possibility. We

shall see  that condition  (4.1),  which characterizes  "instantaneous" games,  is intimately related to the existence of a unique solution to  (4.4).

THEOREM 4.5. If M( (R)) is an instantaneous game, then  (4.4)  has  a unique solution a = v,  and we have v! &lt;   v  &lt;   v2-

PROOF. Uniqueness. Let  (4.4)  have  two solutions v &lt; v. Let x be optimal  in M(v) for player I and let y be  optimal  in  M(v)  for player II. Then xM(v)y &gt; v and xM(v)y &lt; v. Subtracting,  we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence Xq  = Yg  = Ij   and x and y are pure. Thus,  for all i f 0,  j  f 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This contradicts  (4.1).

Existence. The  function F(a)  = val[M(a)] is monotonic nondecreas­ ing. Hence,  by  (4.2),  we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in other words v^ F(v^)  &lt; 0. Similarly,  v ^ -  F C ^ )   &gt; 0.  But a - F(a) is  continuous;  hence it has a zero  in [v^, ^ 2 ' ] ' Q.E.D.

COROLLARY. In the determinate case, v  is  equal  to the  true value.

We note that  if  (4.1)  is not satisfied,  then all values  in the interval [max a^Q,  min aQ^] are solutions of  (4.4),  and no others.

From the fact that F(a) and a - F(a) are both monotonic nonde­ creasing functions,  it follows  that  the  sequence b,  F(b),  F(F(b)),  ... (b arbitrary)  converges monotonically to a solution of  (4.4). This can be use­ ful  in making sharper numerical estimates;  e.g.,  we have F(v^)  &lt; v &lt; F(v2)j

etc.

In the  first  indeterminate game of § 4.2 we have v  = 0,  by symmetry. In the second example we also have v = 0;  thus,  the  first  player's advantage in this game,  such as  it  is,  vanishes  if time is made discrete. This  feature, also present  in the order-equivalent variants,  shows  that strict  inequality need not hold in Theorem 4.5 for  indeterminate games.

## §  5. FICTITIOUS PLAY IN NON-ZERO-SUM GAMES

## 5.1. Discussion

The method of fictitious play  (FP)  resembles a multistage  learning process. At each stage,  it  is assumed that the players choose a strategy that would yield the optimum result  if employed against all past choices of their opponents. Various conventions can be adopted with regard to  the first move,  indifferent alternatives,  simultaneous vs.  alternating moves,  and weighting of past choices. The method can meaningfully be applied to any finite game,  and to many infinite games as well. (See  [3],  [4],  [5]  pp.  8285,  and  [14].)

It was once conjectured that  the mixed strategies  defined by the accumulated choices of the players would always converge to the equilibrium point of the game,  or,  in the event of nonuniqueness,  to a set of mutually compatible equilibrium points. This  is  the natural generalization of Robinson's  theorem  [14]  for the zero-sum two-person case;  it was recently verified by Miyasawa  [12]  for the special case of two players with two pure strategies apiece.

The trouble begins,  as we  shall see,  as soon as we add a  third stra­ tegy for  each player. It appears,  intuitively,  that this  size  is  necessary to produce enough variety;  if FP is  to  fail,  the game must contain elements of both coordination and competition. Our counterexamples  include a whole class of order-equivalent games,  and thus  do not depend on numerical quirks  in the payoff matrices;  nor are they sensitive to  the minor technicalities  of the FP algorithm. It  is  clear that games with more players,  or  with more strategies per player,  can exhibit the same kind  of misbehavior.

## 5.2. A Class of Nonconvergent Examples

We shall elaborate slightly on the game described in the  Introduc­ tion,  to  eliminate any question of "degeneracy.' The payoff matrices are shown at right. We assume that a^ &gt; b^ &gt; c^ and ai ^ ^  ^i*  ^or i  B 1)  2,  3. It  follows  that the game  is not constant-sum. It  is  easily shown that the equilibrium point must be completely mixed  (all strategies  active),  and hence unique.

<!-- image -->

For simplicity,  we  shall assume that  the FP choices are made sim­ ultaneously,  and that the first choice pair is  11. Consider any occurrence of 11 in the FP sequence. The next choice of player I will certainly be 1 again,  since  that  strategy will have become more desirable. Player  II will either stay with 1,  or shift to 3. Eventually,  in fact,  he must shift to 3,  since Thus,  after each run of 11 we will find a run of 13. By a similar argument,  this will be followed by a run of 33,  and then runs of 32,  22,  21,  11,  ..., in a never-ending cycle.

Suppose  that a run of 11 is  just about  to begin. Let X represent the current  "accumulated-choices" vector for player I  (thus, is  the number of times  he has  chosen row i),  and  let Y be  the  same  for player  II. Let H denote the current  "comparative-payoffs" vector for player I  (thus,  H-^  = Yiai + ' ^ ■ &lt; 2 ^ 2 + ^3^3*   etc.). Since he  is  about to choose 1,  we  have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let there occur r ^ choices of 11,  followed by r-^ choices of 13. Then I's new comparative payoffs are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since he shifts  to 3 at this  point,  we must have &gt; H p But &lt; H p hence &gt; H - j ^  -  H p   and we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let r33 be the length of the 33 run that  follows. By analogous reasoning we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Repeating the argument four times more,  we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r ^ denotes  the  length  of the next 11 run. Since  the constant in (5.1) is  greater than 1,  the runs of 11 increase  in length exponentially (or faster). The  same rate of increase occurs  for the other choice pairs. Hence the ratios X ^ / X y Y^/Y y i j,  do not converge. In  particular,  the normalized strategy  vectors x = X/2 X^,  y = Y/2 Y^ do not  converge  to  the unique equilibirum point strategies.

It can be shown that x and y,  in their respective  strategy spaces approach limit cycles which do not contain the equilibrium point strategies. Hence there  is no convergence to an equilibrium point even through subse­ quences  .

The argument we have given is  independent of the tie-breaking rule. With minor modifications  it can also handle the case of alternating moves,  as well as  the case of nonintegral run lengths. The  latter  implies  that  the differential-equation version of FP (see  [3]) will also  fail to converge to the solution.

## 5.3. An Example

We have computed the  limit cycles  for the numerical example shown at right. The payoffs do not satisfy the strict inequali­ ties assumed in the preceding proof,  and the constant in the estimate  (5-1)  is  exactly 1. A more refined analy­ sis,  however,  shows  that the run lengths  do  increase 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 I 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 II

exponentially;  in fact,  the ratio of r|-^ to r ^ tends  in the  limit to

- 9^  where 0  =  1.466 is  a root of 0^ -  0^ =  1.

The  limit cycles  in the separate  strategy spaces  are  illustrated  in Fig.  2. In the product space they form a hexagon;  typical vertices are

- (·) (l,  e4, e2;   e3,   e3,   e&gt;/c,
- (■) (04 , 04 , 02; e5,   03,   e)/ce,  etc.,

where C is  a normalizing constant. The unique equilibrium point is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure  2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

- [1] BASS,  H.,  Order Matrices,  Junior Paper,  Princeton University,  1954.
- [2] BOHNENBLUST,  H.  F.,  KARLIN,  S.  and SHAPLEY,  L.  S.,  "Solutions of discrete,  two-person games," Annals of Mathematics  Study No.  24 (Princeton,  1950),  pp.  51-72.
- [3] BROWN,  G.  W.,   "Iterative  solution of games by fictitious  play," Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation,  John Wiley and Sons,  1951, pp.  374-376.
- [4] DANSKIN,  J.  M.,   "Fictitious  play for continuous  games," Naval Research Logistics Quarterly,  Vol.  1  (1954),  pp.  313-320.
- [5] DRESHER,  M.,   Games  of Strategy: Theory and Applications,  Prentice Hall, 1961.

- [6 ] EVERETT,  H.,  "Recursive games," Annals of Mathematics  Study No.  39, (Princeton,  1957),  pp.  47-48.
- [7] GALE,  D.,  KUHN,  H.  W.  and TUCKER,  A.  W.,   "On symmetric  games," Annals of Mathematics  Study No.  24  (Princeton,  1950),  pp.  81-87.
- [8 ] GALE,  D.,  KUHN,  H.  W.  and TUCKER,  A.  W.,   "Reductions  of game matrices," Annals of Mathematics Study No.  24  (Princeton, 1950),  pp.  89-96.
- [9] GALE,  D.  and SHERMAN, S.,  "Solutions of finite two-person games," Annals of Mathematics Study No.  24  (Princeton, 1950),  pp. 37-49.
- [10] KAPLANSKY,  I.,  "A contribution to von Neumann's  theory of games," Annals  of Mathematics,  Vol.  46  (1945),  pp.  474-479.
- [11] KARLIN,  S.,  Mathematical Methods  and Theory in Games,  Programming and Economics,  Addison-Wesley,  1959.
- [12] MIYASAWA,  K.,  On the Convergence of the Learning Process  in a  2  x  2 Non-zero-sum Two-person Game,  Economic Research Program,  Princeton University,  Research Memorandum No.  33  (1961).
- [13] NASH,  J.  F.,  "Non-cooperative games," Annals of Mathematics,  Vol.  54 (1951),  pp.  286-295.
- [14] ROBINSON,  J.,  "An iterative method of solving a game," Annals of Mathematics,  Vol.  54  (1951),  pp.  296-301.
- [15a] SHAPLEY,  L. S.,  The Noisy Duel: Existence of a Value  in the  Singular Case,  The RAND Corporation,  Rm-641,  July,  1951.
- [15b] SHAPLEY,  L.  S.,  Order Matrices.  I,  The RAND Corporation,  RM-1142, September,  1953.
- [15c] SHAPLEY,  L.  S.,  Order Matrices.  II,  The RAND Corporation,  RM-1145, September,  1953.
- [15d] SHAPLEY,  L.  S.,  A Condition for the Existence of Saddle-points,   The RAND Corporation,  RM-1598,  September,  1955.
- [15e] SHAPLEY,  L. S.,  Symmetric Games,  The RAND Corporation,  RM-2476,  June, 1960.
- [15f] SHAPLEY,  L. S.,  On the Nonconvergence of Fictitious  Play,  The RAND Corporation,  RM-3026,  March,  1962.
- [16] SHAPLEY,  L.  S.,  "Stochastic games," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,  Vol.  39  (1953),  pp.  1095-1100.
- [17] SHAPLEY,  L. S.  and SNOW,  R.  N.,  "Basic  solutions  of discrete games," Annals of Mathematics  Study No.  24  (Princeton,  1950),  pp.  27-35.
- [18] SION,  M.  and WOLFE,  P.,  "On a game without a value," Annals of Mathematics  Study No.  39  (Princeton,  1957),  pp.  299-306.
- [19] VON NEUMANN,  J.  and MORGENSTERN,  0.,  Theory of Games and Economic Behavior,  Princeton,  1944.

L.  S.  Shapley'