## Some  Studies  in  Machine  Learning Using  the  Game  of Checkers.  II-Recent  Progress

Abstract: A new  signature  table technique is described  together  with  an  improved  book  learning  procedure  which  is  thought to be  much superior to the linear  polynomial method described  earlier.  Full  use is made of the so called  'alpha-beta'  pruning  and several  forms  of forward  pruning  to restrict  the  spread of the move tree  and  to permit  the  program  to look  ahead  to a much  greater depth than  it  otherwise could do. While  still  unable to outplay checker  masters,  the program's  playing  ability has been    greatly    improved.

## Introduction

Limited  progress  has  been made in the development  of an improved  book-learning  technique and in the optimization of  playing  strategies  as applied to the checker  playing  program  described  in an earlier  paper  with  this  same title.'  Because  of the sharpening in our understanding and the substantial improvements in playing  ability  that have  resulted from these  recent  studies, a reporting at this  time  seems  desirable.  Unfortunately, the  most  basic  limitation of  the known  machine  learning  techniques, as  previously  outlined,  has  not yet  been  overcome nor has the program  been able to outplay the best human  checker  players?

We  will    briefly    review the earlier  work.  The reader  who does not find  this  review  adequate  might do well to refresh his  memory  by referring to the earlier  paper.

Two  machine  learning  procedures were  described in some detail: (1) a rote learning  procedure  in which a record was kept of the board situation encountered in actual play together    with  information as to    the  results of  the machine analyses of  the situation; this record   could    be    referenced at terminating  board situations  of  each newly initiated tree search and thus, in  effect,  allow  the machine to look ahead turther than time    would    otherwise    permit  and, (2) a generalization  learning  procedure in which the program  continuously  re-evaluated the coefficients for the linear   polynomial  used  to  evaluate the  board  positions at the  ter-

* Stanford University.

1.  'Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game o f Checkers,' IBM Journal 3, 211-229  (1959). Reprinted (with minor additions and corrections) in Computers and  Thought, edited  by  Feigenbaum and Feldman,  McGrawHill,  1963.

2. I n a 1965  match with the program, the World Champion, Mr. W . F. Hellman,  won  all four games played by mail but was played to a  draw in  one  burriedly  played  cross-board game.  Recently  Mr.  K. D.  Hanson,  the  Pacific occasions. Coast Champion, has beaten current versions of the program on two separate

minating board situations of a look-ahead tree  search. In both cases, the program  applied a mini-max  procedure  to back up scores  assigned to  the terminating  situations and so select the best  move, on the assumption that the opponent would  also  apply the same  selection  rules  when  it was  his turn to play. The rote learning  procedure was characterized by a very  slow  but continuous  learning  rate. It was  most  effective  in the opening and end-game  phases  of the play. The generalization    learning    procedure, by way of contrast, learned at a more rapid rate but soon approached  a plateau set by limitations as  to  the adequacy of the man-generated list of parameters used in the evaluation  polynomial. It was surprisingly good at mid-game  play but fared  badly  in  the opening and end-game    phases.  Both learning    procedures were  used  in cross-board  play against  human  players and in self-play, and in spite of the absence of absolute standards were able to improve  the play, thus demonstrating the usefulness  of the techniques  discussed.

Certain expressions  were  introduced  which we will find useful.    These are: Ply, defined as the  number  of  moves ahead, where a  ply  of  two  consists of one  proposed move  by the machine and one anticipated    reply  by  the opponent; 6oardparameter value,* defined as the numerical  value  associated   with    some    measured    property or parameter  of  a board  situation.  Parameter    values, when  multiplied  by learned  coefficients,  become terms in  the  learning  polynomial. The value of  the entire polynomial  is  a score.

The most  glaring  defects  of the program, as earlier discussed,  were  (1) the absence  of an effective machine  procedure for generating  new parameters  for  the evaluation  procedure, (2) the incorrectness of the assumption of linearity

squares to which the player can potentially move. disregarding forced jumps *Example of a board parameter is  MOB  (total  mobility):  the  number of that might be available; Ref. 1  describes  many other parameters.

which underlies the use of a linear polynomial, (3) the general  slowness  of the learning procedure, (4) the inadequacies of  the heuristic procedures used to  prune  and to terminate the tree  search,  and (5) the absence  of  any  strategy  considerations for  altering  the machine    mode of  play  in    the light of  the tactical  situations as they develop during play. While no progress has been made with respect to the first of these defects, some progress has been made in overcoming the other four  limitations, as will now be described.

We will restrict the discussion in  this paper to generalization learning schemes in which a preassigned list of  board parameters is used. Many  attempts have been made to improve this list, to make it both  more  precise and  more inclusive.  It still remains a man-generated list and  it is subject to all the  human failings, both of the programmer, who is not a very good checker player, and of  the checker experts consulted, who are good players (the best in the world,  in fact) but who, in general, are quite  unable to express their immense knowledge of the game in words, and certainly not in words understandable to this  programmer. At  the present time, some twenty-seven parameters are in use, selected from  the  list given in Ref. 1  with a few additions and modifications, although a somewhat longer list was used for some of the experiments which will be described.

Two  methods of combining  evaluations  of these parameters have  been studied  in  considerable detail. The first, as earlier described, is the linear  polynomial  method in which the values for  the individual parameters are multiplied by coefficients determined  through    the  learning  process  and added together to obtain a score.  A  second, more recent procedure is to use tabulations called 'signature tables' to express  the  observed  relationship  between  parameters  in subsets. Values read from  the tables for a number of subsets are  then combined for  the final evaluation.  We will have more  to  say on evaluation procedures after a digression on other matters.

## The heuristic  search for  heuristics

At  the  risk of  some repetition, and of sounding  pedantic,  it might  be  well to say a bit about  the  problem of immensity as related  to the game of checkers. As  pointed  out  in  the earlier paper, checkers is not deterministic in  the practical sense since there exists no known  algorithm  which will predict  the  best  move  short  of  the  complete  exploration  of every acceptable3  path to the end of the game. Lacking time for  sucha search, we must  depend  upon heuristic procedures.

Attempts  to  see how  people  deal  with games such  as checkers or chess4  reveal  that  the better  players engage in behavior  that  seems extremely  complex,  even  a  bit  irrational  in  that  they jump  from  one aspect to  another,  without seeming to complete any one line of reasoning. In fact, from  the  writer's limited observation of checker players he is convinced that  the better the player, the  more  apparent confusion there exists in his approach to the problem, and the  more intuitive his reactions seem to be, at  least as  viewed by the average person not blessed with a similar proficiency. We conclude5 that  at  our  present stage of  knowledge, the only  practical  approach, even with the help of  the digital computer,  will be  through  the development  of  heuristics which  tend  to  ape  human behavior.  Using  a  computer, these heuristics will, o f   course, be weighted in  the  direction of placing greater reliance on speed than might be the case for a human player, but we assume that  the complexity of the   human  response  is dictated  by  the complexity  of  the task to be performed and is,  in  some  way, an indication of how such  problems  can best be handled.

We will go a step  further and maintain that  the task of making  decisions as to the heuristics to be    used    is also  a a problem which can only be attacked by  heuristic procedures, since it is essentially an even more complicated task than is the playing itself. Furthermore,  we  will seldom, if ever, be able to perform a simple test to determine the effectiveness of any   particular  heuristic, keeping everything else the same, as any scientist generally tends to  do.  There are simply too many heuristics that should be tested  and there is simply not enough  time to embark  on  such a program even  if  the  cost  of  computer    time were  no  object. But,   more    importantly,  the heuristics to be tested are  not independent of each other and they affect the other parameters which we would like to hold  constant. A definitive set of experiments is virtually impossible of attainment. We are forced to make compromises, to make complicated changes in the program, varying many  parameters at  the  same time and then, on  the  basis of  incomplete tests, somehow conclude that  our  changes are  or  are  not in the right direction.

## Playing techniques

While the investigation of the  learning  procedures  forms the essential core of the experimental  work,  certain  improvements  have  been made in playing  techniques  which must first  be  described.  These  improvements  are  largely  concerned  with  tree searching. They involve schemes  to  increase the  effectiveness of  the  alpha-beta  pruning, the so-called 'alpha-beta  heuristic'6 and a variety  of  other  techniques

sons which relate to the so-called alpha-beta heuristic,  as will be described  later. 3.  The word 'acceptable' rather than 'possible' is used advisedly for rea-

the Problem of Complexity,' IBMJournd2.320-335 (1958). For references  to 4. See for example, Newell, Shaw and Simon, 'Chess Playing Programs  and other games, see A. L. Samuel, 'Programming a Computer to Play Games,' in Advances in Computers, F. Alt,  Ed.,  Academic Press, Inc.,  New  York, l96Q.

so conclude 5. More precisely  we  adopt the heuristic  procedure  of assuming that we must

veetigxted by  Prof.  McCarthy and his students at M.I.T.  but it  has been in6. So named by  Prof. John McCarthy. This procedure was extensively inadequately described in the literature. It  is, of  course, not a heuristic at all, being a simple algorithmic procedure and actually only a special case  of the more general 'branch  and bound' technique which has been rediscovered  many times and which is currently being exploited in integer programming  research. See A. H. Land and A. G. Doight,   'An  Automatic Method of Solving Disgramming and Extensions, George Dantzig, Princeton University Press, 1963; Crete  Programming Problems'  (1957)  reported in  bibliography Linear  ProM. J.  Rossman and  R. J.  Twery, 'Combinatorial Programming,' abstract K7, Operations Research 6, 634 (1958); John D .  Little, Katta P. Murty, Dura W. Sweeney and Caroline Karel, 'An Algorithm for the Traveling Salesman Problem,' Operations   Research, 11, 972-989  (1963).

Figure 1 A (look-ahead)  move  tree  in which alpha-beta  pruning is fully effective  if  the  tree is explored  from  left to right.  Board  positions for a look-ahead  move by the first player are shown by squares,  while board  positions  for  the second  player are shown  by  circles. The branches shown by dashed lines  can  be  left  unexplored  without  in  any  way  influencing  the final  move  choice.

<!-- image -->

going under the generic name  of tree pruning.'  These improvements enable the program to analyze further  in  depth than it otherwise could do, albeit with the introduction  of certain    hazards  which will be discussed. Lacking an ideal board evaluation scheme,  tree searching still occupies a central role  in the checker program.

## Alpha-beta pruning

Alpha-beta pruning can be explained simply as a technique for not exploring those branches  of  a search tree that  the analysis up  to any given point indicates not  to be of further interest either to the player making the analysis (this is obvious) or  to  his opponent (and  it is this that is frequently overlooked). In effect, there  are  always two scores, an alpha value which must be exceeded for a board to be considered desirable by the side about  to  play, and a beta value which must not be exceeded for the move leading to  the  board  to have h e n   made by the opponent. We note  that if the board should not be acceptable to  the side about  to play, this player will usually be able  to deny his opponent the opportunity of making the move leading to this board, by  himself making a different earlier move. While people use this technique more  or  less instinctively during  their  look-ahead  analyses, they sometimes do  not  understand the full implications of the principle.  The saving in    the  required  amount  of  tree searching which can be achieved through  its use is extremely large, and  as  a consequence alpha-beta  pruning is an almost  essential ingredient  in  any  game  playing  program. There are no hazards associated with this form of pruning.

i n making improvements in the tree  pruning techniques. It would be nice i f we 7.  It   is interesting to speculate on the fact that human learning is involved could assign this learning task  to the computer but no practical way of doing this has yet been devised.

A  move  tree  of    the type  that  results  when  alpha-beta pruning is  effective  is  hown in Fig. 1, it being assumed that the moves are investigated from left to right. Those  paths that  are shown in dashed lines need never be considered, as can be verified  by assigning any  arbitrary scores to the terminals of  the dashed  paths  and by mini-maxing in the usual way. Admittedly the example chosen is quite special but it does  illustrate the  possible  savings  that  can  result.  To realize  the  maximum  saving  in  computational effort  as shown in this example one must investigate the moves in an ideal  order,    this  being the  order which would  result  were each side to always consider its best possible move first. A great  deal  of thought  and effort has gone into devising  techniques which increase the probability that the moves will be investigated in something approaching  this order.

The way in which two limiting values (McCarthy's alpha and beta) are used in pruning  can  be seen by referring to Fig. 2, where the tree of Fig. 1  has been redrawn with the uninvestigated branches deleted. For reasons of symmetry all boards  during the look-ahead  are scored as viewed  by the side whose turn   it  then  is to  move.  This    means  that mini-maxing is actually done by changing  the  sign  of a score, once for each ply on backing up  the  tree, and  then  always maximizing. Furthermore,  only  one  set  of  values  (alpha values) need be considered. Alpha values are assigned to all boards   in    the  tree  (except for the terminating  boards)  as these  boards are generated.  These values reflect the  score which must be exceeded before the branch leading to this board will be entered by the player whose turn it is to play. When the look-ahead is terminated and  the  terminal board evaluated (say at board e in Fig. 2) then the value which currently is assigned the    board two levels up    the tree (in this

Figure 2 The move  tree  of  Fig.  1  redrawn to  illustrate  the detailed  method  used to keep track of the  comparison  values.  Board  positions are lettered in the  order  that they are investigated  and  the  numbers are the successive  alpha values that are assigned to the  boards  as  the investigation  proceeds.

<!-- image -->

case at board c) is used as  the alpha value, and  unless the terminal board score exceeds this alpha value, the player at board c would be ill advised to  consider entering the  branch leading  to this  terminal board.  Similarly  if  the  negative of  the  terminal  board  score  does not  exceed  the  alpha value associated with the  board immediately above in  the tree (in this case at board 6) then the player at bourd d will not consider this to be a desirable move. An alternate way of stating    this second  condition,  in  keeping  with  McCarthy's usage, is to say that  the negative of the  alpha value associated with the  board  one level up  the  tree (in this case board 6) is the beta value which must not be exceeded by the score associated with the  board  in question (in this case board e). A single set of alpha values assigned to the boards in the tree thus performs a dual role, that of  McCarthy's alpha  as  referenced by boards two levels down in  the  tree and, when negated, that of McCarthy's beta as referenced by boards  one  level down  in  the  tree.

Returning to the analysis of Fig. 2, we note  that  during the initial look-ahead (leading to boarde) nothing is known as  to  the value of the boards, consequently the assigned alpha values are all set at minus infinity (actually within the computer  only at  a  very  large  negative  number).  When board e is evaluated, its  score (4-2)  is compared  with  the alpha  at c (-w ), and  found  to be larger. The negative of the score ( - 2 ) is then  compared  with the  alpha at d ( -00) and, being larger, it is used to replace it.  The  alpha at d is now - 2 and  it  is  unaffected by the subsequent consideration of terminal boardsfand g. When  all  paths  from board d have been considered, the final alpha value at d is compared  with  the current alpha value at board b (-00); it is larger, so the negative of alpha  at d (now + 2) is compared with the current alpha value at c (-m) and, being larger, it  is  used  to replace  the c value,  and a new  move  from board c is investigated leading to board h and then board i . As we go down the tree we must assign an  alpha  value to board h. We cannot use the  alpha value at board c since we are now interested in  the minimum that  the  other  side will accept. We can however advance the  alpha  value from board  b, which  in  this  case  is  still  at    its  initial  value  of -  a. Now when board i is evaluated at +1 this value is compared  with  the  alpha  at board c (4-2). The comparison being unfavorable, it is quite unnecessary to consider any other moves originating at board h and we go immediately to a consideration of boards j and k, where a similar situation exists. This process is simply repeated throughout  the tree. On going forward  the  alpha values are advanced  each time from two levels above and,  on  backing up, two comparisons are always made.  When the  tree  is completely explored,  the final  alpha  value  on  the  initial  board  is  the score, and  the  correct  move is along the  path  from  which this alpha was derived.

The saving that results from alpha-beta  pruning  can be expressed either as a reduction in  the  apparent  amount of branching at each node or as  an  increase in the maximum ply to which the search may be extended in a fixed time interval.  With  optimum  ordering, the  apparent branching factor  is  reduced  very  nearly  to  the  square  root  of  its original value or, to put  it  another way, for a given investment    in    computer time, the maximum  ply is very  nearly doubled. With moderately complex trees the savings can  be astronomical.  For  example  consider  a  situation    with a

branching factor of    8. With  ideal alpha-beta pruning  this factor is  reduced to approximately  2.83. I f   time  permits the evaluation of  66,000  boards (about 5 minutes  for checkers), one can look ahead  approximately 10 ply  with alpha-beta pruning. Without alpha-beta  this depth would  require the evaluation of 8 1 ° or  approximately  lo9  board positions and would  require  over 1,000 hours of  computation!  Such  savings are of  course  dependent  upon  perfect  ordering of  the moves.  Actual  savings are not as great but alpha-beta  pruning can easily reduce the work by  factors of  a thousand or more in real game situations.

Some    improvement    results    from the  use    of alpha-beta pruning even without  any attempt to optimize the search order. However, the number  of  branches  which are pruned is then highly variable   depending   upon  the accidental ordering of the moves. The problem  is  further complicated in the case  of   checkers    because    of the variable nature of  the branching.  Using  alpha-beta  alone the apparent branching factor   is    reduced    from    something    in the vicinity  of 6 (reduced from the value of  8 used  above because  of forced jump moves) to about 4, and with the best  selection  of  ordering  practiced  to date, the apparent branching  is  reduced to 2.6. This  leads to a very substantial  increase in the depth to which the search  can  be  carried.

Although the principal use  of the alpha and beta  values is to prune useless branches  from the move tree,  one can also  avoid a certain amount of inconsequential  work whenever the difference  between  the current alpha value and the current  beta  value becomes  small.  This  means that the two sides  have  nearly  agreed  as to the  optimum  score  and that little  advantage to either  one side or the other can  be  found by further exploration  along  the paths under  investigation. It is therefore  possible to back-up  along the tree  until a part of the tree is found at which this  alpha-beta  margin  is  no longer  small. Not finding  such a situation  one  may terminate the search. The added  savings  achieved in this way,  while not  as spectacular as the  savings  from the initial use  of alpha-beta, are  quite  significant,  frequently  reducing the work by an additional factor of two or more.

## Plausibility  analysis

In order for the alpha-beta  pruning to be  truly effective, it is necessary, as already    mentioned,  to introduce    some    technique for increasing  the  probability that the better paths are explored  first.  Several ways  of  doing  this  have  been tried. By far the most  useful  seems to be to conduct a preliminary plausibility  survey  for any given board situation by looking ahead a fixed amount, and then to list the available moves in their apparent order of goodness on the basis  of  this  information and to specify this as the order to be  followed  in the subsequent  analysis. A compromise  is  required  as to the depth to which this  plausibility  survey  is  to be conducted; too short a look-ahead  renders  it of  doubtful value,  while too long a look-ahead takes so much  time  that the depth of the final  analysis  must  be  curtailed.  There  is  also a question as  to whether or not this  plausibility  analysis  should  be applied at  all  ply  levels  during the main  look-ahead or only for the first few  levels. At one time the program used a plausibility    survey  for only the first    two    ply    levels o f the main look-ahead  with the plausibility  analysis  itself  being  carried to a minimum ply  of  2. More  recently the plausibility  analysis  has  been  applied at all  stages  during  the  main look-ahead and it has  been  carried to a minimum ply  of 3 during  certain portions  of  the look-ahead and under  certain  conditions, as will be explained  later.

We pause to note that the  alpha-beta  pruning as described might    be    called a  backward    pruning    technique  in that it enables  branches to be pruned at that time  when  the program is  ready  to back up and is  making  mini-max  comparisons. It assumes that the analyses of all branches are otherwise carried  to a fixed  ply  and that all  board evaluations  are made at this fixed  ply  level. As mentioned  earlier,  the  rigorous application of  alpha-beta    technique    introduces no opportunities  for erroneous  pruning. The  results  in  terms of the final    moves    chosen are always    exactly    as    they    would have  been  without  the pruning. To this  extent the procedure is  not  a  heuristic although the plausibility    analysis    technique which  makes  it  effective  is  certainly  a heuristic.

While the simple  use  of  the plausibility  analysis  has  been found  to  be  quite effective  in  increasing the  amount  of alpha-beta  pruning,  it suffers from two  defects. In the  first place the actual  amount of pruning  varies  greatly from move to move,  depending  upon random variations in the average correctness  of  the  plausibility  predictions.  Secondly,  within even the best  move  trees a wrong  prediction at any  one  point in the search  tree  causes the program to follow a less than optimum path, even  when  it should have  been  possible to detect the fact that a poor prediction  had  been  made  before doing an excessive amount of  useless  work.

## A multiple-path enhanced-plausibility procedure

In studying  procedures  used   by  the better  checker  players one is struck  with  the fact that evaluations are being  made continuously at all levels  of look-ahead.    Sometimes    unpromising  lines  of  play are discarded  completely  after only a cursory  examination. More often less promising  lines are put aside  briefly  and several  competing  lines  of  play  may  be under  study  simultaneously  with attention switching from one to another as the relative  goodness  of the lines of play appears to change  with  increasing  depth  of the tree search. This  action  is  undoubtedly  prompted by a desire  to improve the alpha-beta  pruning  effectiveness, although I have  yet  to find a checker master who  explains  it  in  these  terms.  We ar well  advised  to copy  this  behavior.

Fortunately, the plausibility  analysis  provides the necessary  information  for making the desired  comparisons  at a fairly  modest  increase  in data  storage  requirements  and with a  relatively    small  amount of  reprogramming of  the

tree search. The procedure used  is  as follows. At the beginning of each move, all possible moves are considered and a plausibility search is made for the opponent's replies  to  each of  these plays. These moves are sorted    in  their  apparent order of  goodness. Each  branch is then carried to a ply of 3; that is, making the machine's first move, the opponent's first  reply  and  the  machine's counter  move.  In each  case the moves made are based on a plausibility analysis which is also carried to a minimum depth of 3 ply. The  path yielding the highest score to  the machine at this level  is  then chosen for investigation and followed forward  for  two moves only (that is, making the opponent's indicated best reply and  the machine's best counter reply, always based on a plausibility analysis). At this  point  the  score  found for this path is compared with the score for  the  second best path  as  saved earlier. If  the  path under investigation is now found to be less good  than  an alternate path,  it is stored and  the alternative path is picked up  and is extended in depth by two moves, A new comparison is made  and  the process is repeated. Alternately,  if  the  original  path  under  investigation  is  still found to be the best it is continued for two more moves. The analysis continues  in  this way until a limiting depth as  set by other  considerations  has  been reached.  At  this  point the flitting from  path  to  path is discontinued and the  normal mini-maxing procedure  is instituted.  Hopefully,  however, the probability of having found  the  optimum  path  has been increased  by  this  procedure  and  the alpha-beta  pruning should work with greater effectiveness. The net effect of all of this is to increase the  amount  of  alpha-beta pruning, to decrease the playing time,  and    to  decrease the spread  in playing time from move to move.

This enhanced plausibility analysis does not in  any way affect  the  hazard-free  nature  of  the  alpha-beta  pruning. The plausibility scores used  during the look-ahead  procedure  are used only to determine the  order of the analyses and they are all replaced by properly mini-maxed scores as the analysis proceeds.

One minor point may require explanation. In  order  for all of  the saved scores to be  directly comparable, they are all related to  the same side (actually to  the machine's  side)  and as described they are compared only when it is the opponent's turn  to move; that is, comparisons are made only on every alternate play. It would, in principle, be possible to make  comparisons  after  every move but little is gained by so doing and serious complications arise which are  thought to offset any possible advantage.

A move tree as recorded by the computer  during actual play is shown in Fig. 3. This is simply a listing of the moves, in  the  order in which they were considered, but arranged on the page to reveal the tree  structure. Asterisks are used to indicate alternate moves at branch  points  and  the  principal branches are identified by serial numbers. In the interest of clarity, the moves made during  each  individual plausibility search are  not shown, but  one such search was associated to  be  explained,  the  flitting from    path    to    path is  clearly visible at the start.  In  this case there were 9 possible initial moves which were surveyed at  the start  and listed in  the initially expected best order as identified by the serial numbers. Each of these branches was carried to a depth of  3 ply and  the  apparent best branch was then found to be the one identified by serial number 9,  as may be verified  by  reference to  the  scores at  the  far right (which are expressed in  terms of the side which made  the  last recorded move on  the line in question).  Branch  9 was then  investigated for    four  more moves,  only  to be  put  aside  for    an  investigation  of  the branch identified by the serial number 1  which in  turn  was displaced by 9, then finally back to 1. At this  point  the  normal mini-maxing was initiated. The  amount of flitting  from move to move is,  of  course, critically dependent  upon the exact  board  configuration  being studied.  A  fairly  simple situation is portrayed  by this illustration.  It will be noted that  on  the completion of the investigation of branch 1, the program went back to branch 9, then  to branch 3, followed by branch 2, and so on until all branches were investigated. As a matter of general interest this  tree  is for  the fifth move of a game following a 9-14,22-17, 11-15  opening, after an opponent's move of 17-13,  and move 15-19  (branch 1) was finally chosen. The  7094 computer took 1  minute and 3 seconds  to  make the move and  to  record  the tree. This  game was one of  a  set of  4 games being played simultaneously by the  machine and  the  length of the tree search had been arbitrarily reduced to speed up the play. The  alpha  and beta values listed in the columns to  the  right are  both  expressed in  terms of the side making the  last  move, and hence a score to be considered must be larger than  alpha  and smaller than beta. For clarity of presentation  deletions have been made of most large negative values when they should  appear in the  alpha column and of most large positive values when such values should appear in the beta column. with each recorded move. While the tree of Fig. 3 exhibits the combined effect of several forms of pruning, some yet

## Forward pruning

In addition  to    the  hazardless  alpha-beta    pruning,    as just described,  there  exist  several  forms  of  forward  pruning which can  be  used  to reduce  the size of  the  search  tree. There is always a risk associated with  forward  pruning since there  can be  no  absolute  assurance  that  the scores  that would be obtained by a deeper analysis might not be quite different from those  computed at the earlier ply.  Indeed if this were not so, there would never be any reasons for looking  ahead.  Still  it seems reasonable to assume that some net improvement should result from  the  judicious use of these procedures.  Two  simple forms of  forward  pruning were found to be useful after a variety of more complicated procedures, based on  an  initial imperfect understanding of the problem, had been tried with great effort and little success.

00034

00034

Figure 3 An actual look-ahead move tree as printed by the computer during play.

| 15 19.23-16.12-19 1                                                                                            | MOVE TREE                    | ALPHA BETA SCORE           |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------|
| 7 11.25-22. 5- 9 2                                                                                             |                              | 00014 -00030               |
| 8 11.25-221 4- 8 J 15 18.25-22.18-25 4                                                                         |                              | -00016 -00032              |
| 14 17.21-14.10-17 5 12 16.24-19.15-24 6                                                                        |                              | -00036 -06404              |
| 6 9.13- 6, 2- 9 7                                                                                              |                              | -00037                     |
| 5 9.24-19.15-24 14 18.23-14.10-IT                                                                              | Y n                          | -00044 0002L               |
| 9                                                                                                              |                              | 00013                      |
| 1 24-15v10-19.2623.19-26                                                                                       | 28-19. 8-11125-22.11-15      | OUOlO                      |
| 9 22-18.15-24                                                                                                  |                              | O O O l U                  |
| 1 30-23.                                                                                                       | 8-12.25-L2,14-18 *I          | 00034                      |
| *27-24 -00034                                                                                                  | *12-16                       | 00034 0002 I               |
| t 5- 9 *31-22. 7-10.30-26                                                                                      | 00034 -00034                 | 00024 -00105               |
| 826-2Z1 7-10.27-23.19-26                                                                                       | az7-23 -00034 -00105         | 00045                      |
| *30-26,                                                                                                        |                              | 0003+ b003+ 00036          |
| 3- 7 *31-26+ 3- 7 *27-24. 7-10.24-15.10-19                                                                     |                              | 00034 00036 00034 00033    |
| 831-22, 7-10.30-26 t27-24 -00034                                                                               | -00034                       | -00105                     |
| *27-23 *26-22. 7-10                                                                                            | -00034                       | -00105                     |
| +27-24. 7-10124-15~10-19                                                                                       | 00034                        | 00045 00034 00033          |
| 9                                                                                                              | 27-20                        | -00034-00010               |
| *15-22 * 4- 8                                                                                                  | 00034 -00000 00034 -00036    |                            |
| 8 7-1l119-15.11-l~rL1-17 511-16                                                                                | 00034                        | -00016 -00034-00007        |
| *10-19,23- 7 810-15119-IC. 6-15.13- 6                                                                          | -(I0034 -00034               | 00001 00004                |
| * 1- 5                                                                                                         | 00034                        | -00032                     |
| *IO-15 3 22-18.15-ZZ~26-17vll-16~30-26~ 8-11                                                                   | O W 3 4 OC034                | 00024 -17341               |
| * 5- 9.24-20 r14-18                                                                                            | -00034 00034                 | 00005 -00041               |
| t 3 - a,~2-17,15-19.~4-15,11-1n,28-24 810-19117- 3 5- 9                                                        | -00034 -00034                | 00031 16023 00034 -00037   |
| 8 6- 9 814-18                                                                                                  | 00034                        | U0034 -00105 -00105        |
| 814-17.21-14,10-171Z~lS~15-24r28-19                                                                            | -00034 00031                 |                            |
| S 6- 9.13- 6 , 2- 9-29-25 2 22-17r15-1812622v18-25.29-22.11-15                                                 | 00034 -00030                 | -*u034 00032               |
| * 2 - 1,24-25 8 3- 7                                                                                           | 00034 *lZ-16                 | -00034 -00034              |
|                                                                                                                |                              | 00023                      |
| 8 3- 71L2-17.15-19.2r15r11-1BrZ&Z* *ll-16                                                                      | 00034                        | -00030 -00034 00031        |
| *1C-19v17- 3 t 5- 9 I 6- 9                                                                                     | -00034 00034 00034 -00037    | 16023 -00105               |
| 814-1s 2- 7rZC-19.15-2*rZ8-19.1*-17 * 5-                                                                       | 00034 00034                  | 00034 -00105 4J0045        |
| 8 v                                                                                                            |                              | -0OU45                     |
| *11-1b *ll-l6.24-19                                                                                            | 00034 -00045                 |                            |
| *17-21 4 29-22.1C17~21-14.I0-17~22-ltl. 6- 9113-                                                               | -00034 6                     | OOLOO                      |
| 8 5- 9.24-19. 8-11 I 1- 5                                                                                      | 00034 00034                  | -00007 -00032              |
| * 7-11 8 8-lI.23-IE 7-11                                                                                       | 00034                        | -00036 -00030 -00034ii0007 |
|                                                                                                                | 00034                        |                            |
| 5 24-19.15-24.28-191 5 - 9.25-211                                                                              | 00034 00034 -0 9-14          | -00017 7432                |
| *17-22 * 8-11.25-22 * 7-10                                                                                     | -00034 00034 -00055          | 00031                      |
| * 9-14 7 2 3 - 1 8 . 1 5 - 2 ~ . 2 ~ 1 8 . 1 ' 1 - ~ 3 1 2 b - 1 4 . 8-11.29-25 814-23,27- 2.10-14r24-20. 8-11 | 00034 -00025 -00034 00034 -I | 00030                      |
| 8 9-13 *10-15r24-19                                                                                            | 00034 -15620                 | 5617                       |
| t 3-                                                                                                           | 00034 -00034                 | -LL205 11614               |
| 7 8                                                                                                            | -00034                       | 10416                      |
| * 2- 6 21-14. 6- 9.13- t. 1-17r25-21~17-22~2b-17 * 2-18.26-23, 8-11123-14                                      | 00034 -00034 00034           | -00105                     |
| *12-L6 8 8-11,24-lS115-24128-19, 6- 9 * 4- 8                                                                   | OCUJ4 00034                  | 10436 -10370 -00056        |
| *l5-18,2622 7-10                                                                                               | -00034                       | -00063                     |
|                                                                                                                | OC034 -07410                 | 06541                      |
| 6 28-12. 8-11123-18.14-23127-18,                                                                               | -00034 00034 5- 9911-17      | 06404 -07355               |
| 7-11.23-18.14-23.27-1a. 5-                                                                                     | 811-15 00034 -06446 00034 9  |                            |
|                                                                                                                | *ll-15 -37353 -00034 00034   | 06422                      |
| pLy 3                                                                                                          | 19 2 0 21 1 2                |                            |
| USAGE 11                                                                                                       | 0 0 0                        | 0                          |
| ENDS 0 2 . 15 19                                                                                               | 0 0 0                        | 0 8                        |
| 000342 2 9 b Z l 16                                                                                            | 15-19 7-11 15-16             |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 8-11                         |                            |
| 1 1 1 9                                                                                                        | 2                            |                            |
|                                                                                                                |                              | 8                          |
| 16 8                                                                                                           | 0 0 0 0 0 0                  |                            |
|                                                                                                                |                              | 231                        |
|                                                                                                                | 18                           | TOTAL                      |
| I6 1                                                                                                           | 17                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 13 14 15 16 2 0 0 0          |                            |
| 4 5 6 7                                                                                                        |                              |                            |
| * t i 9                                                                                                        | 12                           | -07364                     |
| 8                                                                                                              |                              |                            |
| 8                                                                                                              |                              |                            |
| 5- 9.23-18                                                                                                     | 11                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 10                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 9                            |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 34                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 14                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 40 32                        |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 29                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 37                           |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 1 2 5 1 2 1 1 2 4 1 3 0 0    |                            |
|                                                                                                                | 2 0                          | 2 0                        |

To apply the first form it is    only    necessary  to  limit the number of  moves  saved  for future analysis at each point in the tree,  with  provisions  for saving all moves  when the ply is  small  and gradually  restricting  the number  saved, as the ply  becomes  greater  until finally  when  the  maximum  feasible ply    is    being approached only two or three  moves are saved.    (The    decision  as to which  are saved is, of  course, based on the plausibility  analysis.) *

In the second form of forward pruning one compares  the apparent  scores as  measured  by  the  plausibility analysis with the  current values of  alpha and beta that are being carried  forward, and terminates  the look-ahead if this comparison is  unfavorable.  Rather  than  to apply this comparison in an unvarying way it seems reasonable  to set margins which  vary  with  the ply so that the amount of pruning increases  with  increasing  ply.  At low  plies  only the most unlikely paths can then be pruned, while  fairly  severe pruning can  be  caused to  occur as  the  effective  ply  limit  is approached.  If the margins are set too high, then only  negligible pruning will result,  while  if they are low or nonexistent, the pruning will  be  extreme and the risks of  unwise  pruning correspondingly  large.

There are, then, several  factors which  may  be  experimentally studied,  these  being the magnitudes  of the several  forms of  pruning  and  the  way  in  which  these magnitudes are caused  to vary  with  the ply. The problem is  even  more complicated than it  might  at first  appear since the various kinds of forward pruning are not independent. It seems reasonable to assume that the rate at which the margins are reduced  in the last described  form of forward pruning and  the rate at which the number pruning is increased in the earlier described  form should  both depend upon the position in the plausibility  listings of earlier boards along the branch under investigation. It  is  quite  impractical to  make  a  detailed study of these  interdependencies  because the range of  possible combinations is  extremely  large and a whole  series  of games  would  have to be played for each combination before valid  conclusions could be drawn. Only a very  few  arrangements have,  in fact, been tried and the final  scheme adopted is    based more on the apparent  reasonableness    of  the arrangement than upon any real data.

## The problem o j   'pitch'  moves

In both of the above forms of forward pruning serious  difficulties  arise with  respect  to the proper consideration of so called 'pitch moves,' that is, of  moves in which a piece  is sacrificed  in  return for a positional  advantage  which eventually leads at least to an equalizing capture if not to  an  actual winning  position.  In  principle,  one should be able  to assign the proper relative  weights to positional and material advantages so as to assess such moves correctly, but these situations generally appear to be so detail-specific that it  is impossible  to evaluate them directly in any way other  than by  look-ahead. Troubles are encountered because of the limited  look-ahead  distance  to  which the plausibility analysis  can be extended; the equalizing  moves  may not be found and as a  consequence a  good pitch    move  may  be pruned.  A two-ply  plausibility search in  which the analysis  is terminated  only  on  a  non-jump  situation  will  correctly evaluate  move  sequences of the type P, J, J, where P stands for pitch and J for jump (with N  used later for non-jump moves  which  are not forcing) but it is  powerless  to evaluate sequences  of the P, J, P, J, J type or of the P, J, N, P, J type. Both  of  these  occur  quite frequently  in normal  play. A three-ply  search  will handle the first of these situations but will still  not handle the second  case. Unsatisfactory as it  is, the best   practical    compromise    which  has  been    achieved  to date seems to be to employ a two-ply  plausibility  search for the normal non-pitch situation and to extend the search to three-ply  whenever the  first  or  the  second  move  of the plausibility search is a jump.  As noted earlier a three-ply search  is  customarily    employed during  the  preliminary multi-path phase of the analysis.

Several  more complicated methods of handling  this problem  have   been  considered, but all of  the methods tried to date have  proved to be  very  expensive  in terms of computing time and all have    been discarded. One of    these  methods which  seemed  to be  marginally  effective  consisted  of a procedure for keeping a separate account of all pitch moves  encountered during the plausibility search, defined  in  this case as sequences  in  which the first  move in  the search is    not a jump  and the second  move is a jump. These pitch moves were sorted on the basis of their relative  scores and a record was kept of  the four best pitch moves. Of  course some of these  moves  might  have been  also  rated  as  good  moves quite  independently of  their  pitch  status,  either  because most or all of the available moves  were  of  this type or because the return  capture was  not  delayed beyond the ply depth of the search. After the normal number of unpruned moves at any branch point had been explored, the best  remaining pitch move (eliminating any already considered) was then  followed up.  Since  most  of  the    apparent pitch moves  may  in  fact be sheer    giveaway    moves,  it was  quite impractical to consider more than a single pitch move but hopefully that apparent pitch which  led  to the highest  positional score should have  been  the most likely    move  to investigate.  This  procedure  causes  a  two-ply plausibility search  to  salvage  one  likely  candidate  per  move  which could be of the P, J, N, J,  J, type and  it increases the power of  the  three-ply plausibility  search correspondingly. Unfortunately a rather high  percentage of the additional moves so considered were found to be of no value and the bookkeeping costs of this procedure also seemed to be  excessive.

As a further extension  of this general  method of handling pitch moves, it is possible to cause pitch sequences  of the P, J, N, P, J type to be  investigated  using  a two-ply  plausibility search. One need only specify that the main tree not be terminated when there is a jump move  pending.  While

the cost  of  this addition might  seem  to be small, in practice it leads to the exploration in depth of  extended  giveaway sequences, and as a consequence it is  of  very questionable value.

## Look-ahead termination

Regardless of the form or amount of forward pruning the time arrives along each path when it is  necessary to terminate the look-ahead and evaluate the last board  position. It is rather instructive  to consider the termination as simply the end of the pruning process  in  which the pruning is  complete. The use  of a fixed depth for this final act of pruning, as  previously  assumed, is  of  course  not at  all  reasonable  and in fact it has never  been  used. In the earlier work1  much attention was   given  to the wisdom  of  terminating the lookahead at so called "dead"  positions. With the current use made of the plausibility  analysis  this becomes a restriction mainly applicable  to the plausibility  analysis and it is of  but little value in terminating the main tree itself. A limit is, of course, set by  the amount of  storage assigned for the tree but since  the tree storage  requirements  are not excessive  this should normally not be  allowed to operate. I f   the plausibility analysis  is at all effective one should be able to ration the computing time to various branches on the basis of  their relative probability of  being the best. For example, the initial  path  which    survives  the  swapping routine  during the initial  look-ahead  procedure  should  certainly  be carried quite far along as compared with a path resulting from investigating, say, the  fourth choice as found by the plausibility, when this is again followed  by  a fourth choice, etc., all the way through the tree.

The procedure found most effective has been that of defining a parameter called the branching count which  is    assigned a value for each board encountered during the tree search. To insure that all of the possible initial moves are given adequate consideration, identical values are given to the counts for the resulting boards after these initial moves. As each move originating  with one of  these boards is made, the branching count for the originating  board is  reduced  by one unit and the resulting board after the move  is  assigned this  new  value  as  well.  This  process is  repeated  at each branch  point  down  the  tree  until  the  branching  count reaches zero, whereupon the search down this path is terminated (more correctly steps are taken to initiate termination unless other factors call for a further extension of  the search,  as will  be  explained later).  Along  the  preferred branch, the branching count will thus be reduced by  one unit for each ply  level.  For the second  choice  at any branch point  a  two-unit reduction occurs, for the third  choice a three-unit, etc. The net result is that the less  likely paths are terminated sooner than the most  likely paths and in  direct proportion to their decreasing likelihood.

Actually, a slightly more complicated procedure is   used in that the branching count is set at a higher initial value and  it is reduced  by one unit when the move under consideration is a jump move and by four units when it is a normal move. This procedure causes the search  to be  extended  further along those paths involving  piece  exchanges than  along those that  do  not. Also the search is not permitted to terminate automatically when the branching count reaches zero if the indicated score for the move under consideration implies that this is in fact a  preferred path. In this  case the search is   extended  until the same depth has been  reached along this path  as  had  been  reached along the previously indicated preferred path.

## Tree  pruning results

It has been  found singularly diacult  to assess the relative value of  the  various tree pruning  techniques    in  terms of their effect on the goodness of play.  Special situations can always be  found  for  which the various  forward  pruning procedures are  either  very  effective or  quite  inadequate. Short of  very   extensive  tests indeed, there seems to be no very  good way  to  determine the  relative ferquency with which these different situations occur during normal play. About  all that has been done has been to observe the resulting game trees and to depend upon the opinions of checker masters as to the goodness  of the resulting  moves  and as to the reasonableness  in appearance of the trees.

As mentioned earlier, for each move that is tabulated in Fig. 3 there  was  actually  an  auxiliary  plausibility move analysis to a ply  of 2 or more which is not shown at all for reasons of  clarity. One can think of this as a fine brush of moves emanating from each recorded move. Examples  of  all types of  pruning can be noted in this tree, although additional information is  needed  for their unambiguous identification. Checker experts all agree that such trees as these are  much  denser  than they probably should be. Attempts to make them less  dense by  stronger pruning always  seem to result in occasional examples of  conspicuously poor play. It may well  be that denser trees should be  used for machine play than for human play, to compensate  for deficiencies  in the board evaluation methods.

## Evaluation    procedures    and    learning

Having covered the major improvements in    playing    techniques as they relate to tree searching,  we can now consider improvements in  evaluation  procedures, with  particular reference to learning. We  will  first  discuss the older linear polynomial  scheme and then go on  to consider the signature-table procedure.

## Linear polynomial evaluations

While it is  possible to allow for parameter interaction, for example,  by  using binary connective terms as described in Ref. 1  the number of such interactions is large, and it seems necessary  to consider more than pair-wise  interactions.  This makes it quite difficult to depart very much from the linear

case. Some  improvement  in  performance resulted when the overall  game  was split,  initially,  into 3 phases  (opening, mid-game, and end-game) and more recently into 6 phases with a different set of coefficients  determined for each phase. Various procedures for defining the phase of the game were tested, the simple one of making the determination solely in terms of the  total  number of pieces on  the  board seemed as good as any  tried,  and there  were  indications  that  little was to be  gained by going to more than 6 phases.

The  total number of parameters used at  any  one time has been varied from a very  few to as  many as 40. It  has  been customary to use  all  of    the  currently  assessed  successful parameters  during the learning phase. A number of attempts have been made to speed up  actual play by limiting the number of  parameters to 5, 10, 15, or 20, selecting those    with the larger  magnitude coefficients. Five   terms    in  the learning polynomial  proved  definitely inadequate,  an improvement in going from 10 to 15 terms    appeared  to be barely discernible, and  no  evidence could  be found for improvements in using more than 20 terms. In fact,    there  seemed to  be  some  indication that  a  fortuitous combination of many  ineffectual  parameters with  correspondingly  low coefficients could,  on  occasion,  override  a  more  effective term and cause the program to play less  well than  it  would with  the  ineffectual  parameters  omitted. In a  series of 6 games played against R. W. Nealey (the U. S. blind checker  champion)  using 15 terms,  the  machine  achieved 5 draws with one loss. The six poorest moves in these games as selected by L. W.  Taylor, a checker  analyst,  were replayed, using  20  terms  with  no  improvements  and  then using only 10 terms  with  a  distinct  improvement  in two cases. There  is, of  course,  no  reason  to  believe  that    the program  with the fewer number  of terms  might  not have made  other    and more  grievous  errors    for    other untested board situations. Twenty terms were used during the games with W. F. Hellman referenced in footnote 2. No further work  has been  done   on    the  linear  polynomial  schema  in view  of  the  demonstrated  superiority of  the  'signaturetable'  procedure which will now be described.

## Signature-table evaluations

The  impracticality  of  considering  all  inter-parameter effects and  the obvious  importance  of such interactions has led to  the  consideration of  a number  of  different compromise proposals.  The first  successful  compromise  solution was proposed and tested on  the Project Mac computer by Arnold  Criffith, a graduate student  at  M.I.T.  In  one  early modification of this scheme, 8 subsets of 5 parameters  each were  used,  initially  selected from 31 different  parameters with  some    redundancy  between  subsets.  Each    subset  was designated as a signature  type  and  was characterized by an argument  computed  in  terms of the values measured for the parameters within the subset for any particular board situation. The arguments for each  signature type thus specify particular  combinations of  the parameters within the subset and serve  as  addresses  for  entering  signature  tables where the  tabulated  values are meant to reflect the relative worth to the computer's side of these particular  combinations. In the initial Griffith scheme the values read from  the  8 different signature  tables were simply added together to  obtain the final board evaluation.  Parameters  which are  thought to be somehow related were grouped  together  in  the individual subsets. While it would have been desirable to consider all possible values for each  parameter  and all possible interrelations  between  them,    this quickly  becomes unmanageable.  Accordingly,  the range  of  parameter  values was restricted to but three values + 1, 0, and -1 ; that is, the two sides could be equal  or  one  or  the  other could  be ahead  in  terms of the  board  property in question.  Many of the  board properties were already of this type.  With each parameter  limited to 3 values and with 5 parameters  in  a subset, a total of 36 or 243 entries in a signature table completely  characterizes  all possible  interactions  between  the parameters. Actually since checkers is a 'zero sum'  game and since all  parameters are defined symmetrically, it should be  possible  to reduce  the    table  size roughly  by  two (122 entries instead  of 243) by  listing values for positive arguments  only and taking values with a reversal of  sign when negative arguments are evaluated.  Allowing for 48 signature  tables, 8 signature types  for  each  of  the 6 different phases, we arrive at a memory space requirement  for 5856 table entries. Actually two  words per table  entry  are used during the learning  phase, as explained later,  so the  total memory requirement for  the  learning data is 11,712 words.

An example will make this  procedure  clear. Consider one signature  type which might comprise the following 5 parameters: ANGLE, CENTER, OREO, GUARD and KCENT, which will not be explained now but which all have to  do with the control of the king row and  the  center of the  board.  Now consider the GUARD parameter.  This  can be assigned a value of 0 if  both  or  neither  of  the sides have complete control of their  back rows, a value of +1 if the side in question  controls his back  row  while the  opponent does not,  and a value of -1 if the  conditions are  reversed. The  other 4 parameters can be similarly valued, giving a ternary  number consisting of a 5-digit string selected from  the set -  , 0, and +, (where -is used for -1, etc.), e.g., '+ -0 -  -' characterizes one particular  combination  of  these five different parameters.  This    argument    can    be    associated with some  function value, a large positive value if it is a desirable combination, a near  zero  function value if the advantages to  the two sides are  about even, and a large negative value if it is a disadvantageous  combination.  Both the  arguments  and  functions are symmetric; that is, the argument and function for  the other side would be that gotten by reversing all signs. (In the -  , 0, + ternary system the first symbol in the list gives the sign and  the  processes of  complementing and sign reversal are synonymous.) The argument for  the  other side would

Entries

I

Figure 4 A 3-level signature-table  arrangement  with 27 terms.

<!-- image -->

thus be -+ 0 + +, a negative number which would not be tabulated  but  the function value would  be the negative of the value listed under + -0 -  -, as  it  of course  must be for  the  sum of the functions for  the  two sides to be zero.

The results  obtained   with    this  relatively simple method of  handling  parameter  interactions  were quite encouraging and as  a result a series of  more elaborate studies has  been made using signature procedures of varying degrees of complexity. In particular, efforts were made (1) to decrease the total number of  parameters by eliminating those  found  to be of marginal utility, ( 2 ) to increase the range of values permitted for each  parameter,  initially increasing the range for certain  parameters  to  permit  7  values (-3,   - 2 , -  1 , 0, + 1,   +2, +3) and more recently dividing the parameters into two equal groups-one group being restricted in  range to 5 values, and ( 3 ) to introduce  a hierarchical  structure of signature  tables  where the  outputs  from  the first level signature tables are combined  in  groups  and used as  inputs  to  a set of second level tables etc. (This is illustrated  in  a  simplified form in  the cover design of this issue.)

Most of the experimental  work  has been restricted  to a consideration of the two  arrangements  shown in Figs. 4 and 5.  These are  both three-level arrangements.  They  differ in the degree of the correlation between parameters  which is

Figure 5 Revised    3-level    signature-table    scheme    with 24 terms.

recognized and in the range of  values permitted  the individual parameters.  Both  are compromises.

Obviously, the  optimum arrangement depends upon  the actual number of parameters that must be used, the degree to which these parameters  are interrelated and  the  extent to which these individual  parameters  can be safely represented by a limited range of integers. In the case of checkers, the desired number of parameters seems to lie in  the  range of 20 to 30. Constraints on  the  range of values required to define the parameters  can  be easily  determined  but  substantially  nothing is known concerning the interdependencies between the parameters. A series of  quite inconclusive experiments was performed  in an  effort to measure these interdependencies. About all that can be said is that the  constraints  imposed upon  the  permissible distribution of pieces on  the  board  in any actual game, as set by the rules of the game and  as dictated by good playing procedures,  seem to produce an  apparent average correlation between all parameters which is quite  independent of the specific  character of these  parameters.  The problem  is further    complicated  by the fact that  two  quite  opposing lines of  argument  can be advanced-the one  to  suggest that closely related  terms  be placed in the same subsets to allow for their interdependencies and  the  second to suggest that such terms be scattered

1 1

among groups. The second  suggestion  can be made to look reasonable  by considering  the situation  in  which two parameters are unknowingly so closely related as to actually  measure the same property. Placing  these  two terms in the same subset    would    accomplish nothing,  while  placing them  in different subgroups permits a direct trade-off evaluation to be made between this property in  question and the properties measured by the other parameters in  both  subgroups.

A few comments are  in  order at this time as to  the  supposedly  symmetrical  nature of  the  parameter data. While it is true that checkers  is a zero-sum game and while it is true that the parameters are all defined in a symmetrical  way, that is, as far  as  black vs white  is  concerned,  the value  of  a board situation as defined by these parameters is actually dependent upon whose turn it is to play. A small but real bias normally  exists  for most parameters in favor of the side whose turn it is to move, although for certain parameters the reverse is  true. The linear polynomial  method of scoring is unfortunately not  sensitive to these peculiarities of  the different parameters since  the partial scores  for all types are simply  added  together.  The  signature  table  procedure should be able to  take  the added complication  into account. Of course, the distinctions  will  be  lost if the data  are  incorrectly stored or if they are incorrectly acquired. By storing the data    in    the  uncompressed form one can evaluate this effect. More will  be said about this matter later.

In  the arrangement shown in Fig. 4 there were  27  parameters divided into 9 groups of three each, with each group being made up of one  3-valued parameter,  one  5-valued parameter and one 7-valued parameter. Each first  level  signature table thus had 105 entries. The  output values from each of these tables were quantized into five values and second level signature tables were  employed to combine these in  sets of three. These second level tables thus had 125 entries each. These outputs  are  further quantized into 7 levels and a third level signature table with 343 entries was  used to combine the outputs from the three second-level tables into a final output which  was  used  as the final  board evaluation. Obviously,  the parameters used to enter the first  level tables were grouped together on the basis of their assumed (and  in some cases measured) interdependencies  while the resulting  signature types were  again grouped together as well as possible, consistent with their assumed interdependencies. As always, there was a complete set of these tables for each of the six game phases. The tables were stored in full, without making use  of  the zero-sum characteristic to halve their size, and occupied 20,956  cells in memory. Outputs from the first  level tables were quantized into 5 levels and the  outputs  from  the second  level  tables into 7 levels.

## The latest signature table procedure

The arrangement shown in Fig. 5 used  24  parameters which were  divided  into 6 subgroups of 4 parameters each, with each  subgroup  containing  one  5-valued  parameter  and three 3-valued parameters. In this case the first level  tables were compacted by taking advantage of the assumed symmetrical character of  the data, although  this is a  dubious procedure as already noted. It was  justified  in  this case  because of the added parameter interactions which this made possible and because  of a very large inverse  effect  of table size on speed of learning. This reduced the size  of the first level tables to 68 words each. The  outputs  from  the first  level tables were quantized into 5 levels as before and the  outputs    from    the  second level tables were  quantized into  15 levels.  The  second  and  third  level  tables were  not  compacted, in  an attempt  to preserve some non-symmetrical features. The total memory requirement for the tables as thus constituted was  10,136 words.

Before we can discuss  the results obtained with the signature table scheme it will be  necessary  to turn our attention to the various book learning procedures.

## Book learning

While book learning was mentioned briefly in Ref.  1, we will  describe  it  in some detail as  it was  used  throughout  the studies now to be reported. Just as books speed up human learning, one might  expect  that  a  substantial  increase in machine-learning  speed  might result if  some use  could be made of book information, in  this  case, the existing library of master play.  To this end a reasonable sample (approximately 250,000  board  situations) of  this master  play  has been  key  punched  and transcribed to magnetic tape. These are mostly  draw games; in those cases  where a  win  was achieved, data are used only from the moves  made by the winning    side. The  program  has  been  arranged  to  play through these recorded games  considering  one side,  then the other, much as a person might do,  analyzing the situation in terms of the existing evaluation procedures and listing the preferred  move.  This move  is then compared with the bookrecommended  move  and a suitable adjustment made in the evaluation  procedure.  This,  of  course,  assumes that  the book-recommended move  is the only correct move,  which it may not be, either because of a plurality of good moves or in  some  cases  because  of an  actual  error. However,  if enough book moves are used, if the books are usually correct and if the adjustments per move are of the proper size, the process should converge toward an optimum evaluation procedure, subject always to a basic limitation as to the appropriateness and completeness of the parameter list  used.

While  it  still  takes a substantial amount of machine  time to  play  through  the necessary book  games, the  learning process is    very    much  faster than for learning from actual play. In  the first  place, the game paths followed  are from the start representative of the very  best  play  since  the program is forced always to make the recommended book move before proceeding to considering the next  move.  Secondly, it is  possible  to assign  values  to be associated with the moves in a very direct fashion  without depending upon the unrelia-

ble  techniques  which  were  earlier  described.  Finally  the analysis of  each move can be extremely limited, with  little or  no minimaxing,  since the only use made of the overall scores  is    that of  measuring  the  learning,  whereas  in  the earlier    procedures  these  scores  were needed  to determine credit assignments to  the parameters. The  net effect of these factors is to  make  it possible to consider many more moves, at  the  rate of 300 to 600 moves per minute rather than  the roughly  one  move  per  minute  rate which  is  typical  for actual games.

We will first explain how learning is achieved in terms of coefficients in a  linear  polynomial  and  then  go  on  to  the signature table case.

During    the  learning  process,  use  must  be  made  of the previously determined  coefficients to  perform  the evaluation of all board situations  either  right  after he initial moves or, if jump situations are encountered, at some  terminating ply depth with the scores backed up by the mini-maxing procedure.  During  this  mini-maxing,  it  is  also  necessary  to back up  the  values of the parameter values themselves (i-e., the  terms  without coefficients), associated with the selected terminating  board  situations  corresponding to  the optimized path leading from each of the possible first moves. If there  are  9 possible moves, a 9 X 27 table will be produced in which the rows correspond to  the  9 different moves and the columns  correspond to  the  27 different parameters. On the basis of the book  information,  one  row  is indicated  as being the best move.

The program  must analyze the  data  within the  table  and accumulate totals which on  the average indicate the relative worth  of  the different parameters  in predicting  the    book move, and it must alter  the coefficients  to  reflect the cumulative learning indicated by these totals. A variety of different procedures has been tested  for accumulating  totals;  one of the simplest, and surprisingly, the most effective, seems to be to simply count  the  number of  moves, for each parameter separately, for which the parameter value is larger than the value associated with the  book  move and  the number of moves for which the parameter  value  is smaller than  the value associated  with  the  book  move.  If  these  cumulated counts  over  all  board  situations  examined  to  date  are designated Hand L, then one measure of the goodness of the parameter  in  predicting  the  book  move is given by

.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  has  the dimensions of a correlation coefficient.  It  would have a value of + 1  if the parameter  in  question always predicted the  book  move, a value of -1 if it never made a correct prediction, and a value of 0 if there was no correlation between the machine  indications and  the  book.  The  best procedure found  to  date is simply to use the values of  the C's so obtained  as  the coefficients in  the evaluation polynomial, although arguments  can  be advanced for  the use of the values of the C's raised  to some power greater than  1

to  overcome  the  effect  of several  inconsequential  terms  overriding a valuable indication from some other  term  as  mentioned earlier.

Typical  coefficients as  tabulated by  the  computer  are shown  in  Table 1  based  on roughly 150,000 board situations and using 31 functions  during the learning process. The 19 terms  per  phase  having the largest  magnitude  coefficients are listed. The play against Hellman mentioned earlier used this  particular set of  terms.

## Book learning using signature tables

Extending  this book learning  technique to    the  signature table case is relatively easy. All that need be done is to back up  the signatures corresponding to the signature types being used in a way quite  analogous  to  the handling  of  parameters in  the linear  polynomial case.  Taking  the example used earlier,  one signature  corresponding to  one  possible move might be + -0 -  -(actually stored in    the machine    in binary form). Each signature  type  for each possible move is similarly characterized. Two  totals  (called D and A) are accumulated for each of  the possible signature types.  Additions of 1 each are  made  to the D totals for  each  signature for  the moves that were not identified as  the preferred book move and  an  addition of n, where n is the number of  nonbook moves, is made  to  the A totals  for the  signatures identified with  the recommended  book move. The reason for adding n to  the  book move A totals is, of  course, to give greater  positive  weight  to    the    book recommended  move than  is  the negative weight given to moves that  do  not happen to correspond to  the  currentIy found book recommendation (there may be more  than  one  good move and some other  authority might  recommend  one of the  other  moves). This  procedure  has  the incidental  effect  of  maintaining equality  between the    grand    totals  of  the A's and D's accumulated  separately  for all  signatures in  each  table,  and so of  preserving a zero-sum character for  the  data.

When enough data have been accumulated for  many  different board situations, additions will have been  made in the A and D columns  against  most  of the signature  arguments. The program then computes  correlation coefficients for each  signature  defined in  an analogous  fashion  to the earlier usage as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  the case of the  third  level table these values are used directly as  board  evaluations. For  the  other two levels in  the signature table hierarchy,  the    actual  values to be entered must  be  quantized  so as to restrict  the  range  of  the  tabulated values. This  quantization has normally  been done by first  separating out all  zero  values and entering  them  into the tables as such. The nonzero values are  then quantized by ranking  the positive  values  and  negative  values  separately  into    the  desired  number  of  equisized  groups.    The table  entries  are then  made  in  terms of  the small positive

Table 1 Linear  polynomial  terms  (parameter  names  and  learned  coefficients)  as  used  in the games  with W. F. Hellman.  These  coefficients resulted    from    an    analysis o f approximately 150,000 book moves.

| Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   | Phase I - Termsand coefficients   |
|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
|                                   | GUARD QUART                       | DIAGL                             | EDGES                             | FRONT                             | ANGLE                             | CENTR                             | NODES                             | DCHOL                             | ADVAN                             |
|                                   | 0.33 0.29                         | -0.21                             | -0.20                             | -0.19                             | -0.18                             | 0.14                              | 0.13                              | 0.11                              | -0.08                             |
| PINS                              | DYKSQ                             | FREE                              | EXCHS                             | THRET                             | STARS                             | PRESS                             | UNCEN                             | LINES                             |                                   |
| 0.07                              | 0.07                              | 0.06                              | -0.05                             | 0.04                              | 0.04                              | -0.04                             | 0.03                              | 0.02                              |                                   |
| Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 2 - Terms and coefficients  |
| SPIKE                             | GUARD                             | EDGES                             | QUART                             | CENTR                             | ANGLE                             | FRONT                             | ADVAN                             | SHOVE                             | THRET                             |
|                                   | 0.85 0.36                         | -0.24                             | 0.23                              | 0.21                              | -0.21                             | -0.19                             | -0.18                             | 0.16                              | 0.14                              |
|                                   | NODES PINS                        | DCHOL                             | STARS                             | OFSET                             | HOLES                             | DIAGL                             | UNCEN                             | MOBIL                             |                                   |
|                                   | 0.13 0.11                         | -.lo                              | -0.09                             | 0.09                              | 0.09                              | -0.09                             | 0.08                              | 0.05                              |                                   |
| Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 3 - Termsand coefficients   |
|                                   | SPIKE KCENT                       | PANTS                             | GUARD                             | FRONT                             | CRAMP                             | ADVAN                             | EDGES                             | CENTR                             | STARS                             |
|                                   | 0.88 0.48                         | 0.42                              | 0.37                              | -0.23                             | 0.23                              | -0.23                             | -0.22                             | 0.20                              | -0.19                             |
|                                   | QUART ANGLE                       | THRET                             | DCHOL                             | PINS                              | SHOVE                             | NODES                             | UNCEN                             | OFSET                             |                                   |
|                                   | 0.19 -0.19                        | 0.15                              | 0.14                              | 0.13                              | 0.10                              | 0.10 0.08                         | 0.09                              |                                   |                                   |
| Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 4 - Termsand coefficients   |
| SPIKE                             | GUARD                             | PANTS                             | KCENT                             | STARS                             | ADVAN                             | FRONT                             | THRET                             | ANGLE                             | EDGES                             |
|                                   | 0.86 0.62                         | 0.61                              | 0.56                              | -0.30                             | -0.30                             | -0.27                             | 0.26                              | -0.23                             | -0.22                             |
|                                   | DIAGL CENTR                       | SHOVE                             | QUART                             | PINS                              | UNCEN                             | OFSET                             | DENYS                             | UNDEN                             |                                   |
|                                   | 0.22 0.20                         | 0.18                              | 0.16                              | 0.12                              | 0.1 1                             | 0.09                              | 0.09                              | -0.07                             |                                   |
| Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  | Phase 5 - Terms and coefficients  |
| GUARD                             | SPIKE                             | PANTS                             | KCENT                             | THRET                             | DIAGL                             | ADVAN UNCEN                       |                                   | ANGLE                             | SHOVE                             |
|                                   | 0.81 0.68                         | 0.62                              | 0.55                              | 0.36                              | 0.33                              | -0.32                             | 0.27                              | -0.26                             | 0.25                              |
|                                   | UNDEN FRONT DE YS                 |                                   | PINS                              | CENTR                             | EDGES                             | DYKSQ                             | QUART                             | DEUCE                             |                                   |
|                                   | -0.22 -0.22                       | 0.20                              | 0.19                              | 0.18                              | '0.16                             | -0.16                             | 0.15                              | 0.06                              |                                   |
| Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   | Phase 6 - Termsand coefficients   |
|                                   | PRESS KCENT                       | UNCEN UNDEN                       |                                   | DYKSQ                             | DENYS                             | SHOVE                             | DIAGL                             | SPIKE                             | THRET                             |
|                                   | - 0.54 0.54                       | 0.45                              | -0.41                             | - 0.40                            | 0.40                              | 0.39                              | 0.39                              | 0.37                              | 0.36                              |
|                                   | EXCHS OFSET                       | ADVAN                             | PINS                              | ANGLE                             | FRONT                             | DEUCE                             | FREE                              | QUART                             |                                   |
|                                   | '0.34 -0.26                       | -0.24                             | 0.23                              | -0.23                             | -0.32                             | -0.16                             | -0.11                             | 0.08                              |                                   |

and negative integer numbers  used to specify the relative ranking order of these groups.

This process of updating the signature  tables themselves is done  at  intervals as determined by the  rate  at which significant data accumulate. During  the  intervals between updating,  additions are, of course, continually being made to the tables of A's and D's.

There    are  several problems  associated  with  this newer learning scheme. Reference has already been made to the space  and time  limitations which  restrict  the  number  of parameters to be combined in  each  signature  type and restrict the range allowed for each parameter. The program has been written so that these numbers may be easily varied but this facility is of little use because of the very rapid rate at  which the performance and  the storage  requirements vary with the values chosen. Values less than those  indicated  lead to performance but little different from  that exhibited  by the older linear polynomial experiments, while larger values greatly increase the memory requirements and slow down the learning  rate. A great  deal  of juggling is required in order  to  make  ven the simplest change if the operating times are  to  be kept within a reasonable range, and this still further  complicates  the  problem  of  considering  meaningful experiments.

This inverse effect  of  the  table  size on  the  learning rate comes about because of the need to accumulate data in the A and D columns for each  signature  table  entry. The effect is, of course, compounded by the hierarchical nature of the table complex. At  the  start of a new learning run there will be no entries in  any of the tables,  the computed C's must all be set to zero and  the program will have no basis for the mini-maxing  procedure.    Depending    upon the  particular selection of  the  book games used there  may,   in    fact, be a relatively long  period  of time before  a  significant fraction of  signatures  will have been encountered, and as a  consequence, statistically  unreliable data will persist in the 'C' table.  Not only will the individual  function values be suspect but  the  quantizing levels  will perforce be based on insufficient data  as  well. The magnitude of  this effect  will,  of course, depend upon the size of the tables that  the  program is generating.

Palliative measures can be adopted  to  smooth  the C tables in order to compensate for  the blank  entries  and  for entries based  on  insufficient  data.    Four of the  more  effective smoothing techniques have been found  to be (1) smoothing by  inversion, ( 2 ) smoothing  from  adjacent  phases, (3) smoothing by interpolation and (4) smoothing by extrapolation.  Smoothing  is,  of  course, most needed during the early

stages of the learning process but  it  also must be used during play even after a rather extensive learning run.

Table 2 Correlation  coefficients  measuring  the effects  of  learning for the signature  table  procedure and for the linear  polynomial procedure  as  a  function of the  total  number  of  book  moves analyzed.  These  tests  used 27 parameters which for the signature table score  were  grouped  in the  configuration  shown  in  Figure 4.

-0.08

0.13

0.27

0.31

As a matter of fact,  certain  signatures are so improbable during  book  play  (some  may  in  fact be  impossible) that voids are still found to exist in  the signature tables,  even after playing 100,000 book game board situations.  There  is the reassuring thought that signatures not  found  during the learning process are also unlikely to be found during play. However,  because of  the very  many  board  situations  explored  during  the   look-ahead  process and presumably  because of the consequences of making decisions on  the  basis of  statistically  unreliable  entries,  the  quality  of  the  play using unsmoothed data was found to be somewhat erratic until a fairly large amount of  learning had been achieved. 0.15 0.16

0.34

0.36

0.38

0.41

0.42

0.43

0.43

0.43

It should be pointed out,  that  the  smoothing techniques are  employed as  temporary expedients. All previous smoothed results are discarded and completely new calculations of values of C are made periodically during learning from  the  accumulated and uncorrupted A and D data.  The effects of  smoothing do persist, however, since the entries in the second and  third  level tables, and hence the locations at which the A and D data  are  stored are influenced by  it. 0.15 0.16 0.19 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26

0.45

0.45

0.46

0.46

Smoothing by inversion is done by averaging positive and negative entries (with compensating sign inversions), and  it is  partially  justified  by  the zero-sum  symmetrical  characteristic of the data. 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.26

0.47

0.47

0.48

Smoothing from adjacent phases is done by transferring data between phases. This is possible because of the  random way in which data accumulate  for  the different phases, and it is reasonably  valid because the values associated with a given  signature  vary  but  little  between  adjacent  phases. This form of smoothing has been found to be of  but limited utility since  the  same reasons which account for  the absence of specific  data  for  one phase often operate  to prevent corresponding  data    from being  generated for  adjacent phases. 0.26 0.26 0.26

Smoothing by interpolation is based on  the  assumption that a  missing correlation    for  a  signature which  contains one  or  more  zeros  in  its  argument can  be  approximated by averaging the values appearing for   the  related  signatures where the zeros are individually replaced by a + and then by a -  . In  order  for this to be effective there  must be data available  for  both  the + and -cases  for  at  least  one of the zero-valued parameters.  This form of smoothing  assumes a linear relationship  for  the effect  of  the parameter to which the interpolation is applied. It is therefore, no better as  far  as this one parameter is concerned than  the  older linear  polynomial  procedure.  This  form  of smoothing  is quite ineffectual since all too often balanced pairs of entries cannot be found.

Smoothing  by  extrapolation  may  take  two  forms,  the simplest being when entries are  found  for  the zero value of some  particular  function and for  either  the + or  the -case and a void  for    the  remaining  case is  to be filled. All too

|                                          | Correlation coefficient, C   | Correlation coefficient, C   |
|------------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
| Total number of book moves analyzed case | Signature table              | Polynomial case              |
| 336                                      |                              | -0.18                        |
| 826                                      | +0.06                        | -0.13                        |
| 1,272                                    |                              | +0.06                        |
| 1,769 0.10                               | 0.18                         |                              |
| 2,705                                    |                              |                              |
| 3,487                                    |                              |                              |
| 4,680                                    |                              |                              |
| 5,446                                    |                              |                              |
| 8,933                                    |                              |                              |
| 10,762                                   | 0.39                         | 0.20                         |
| 14,240 0.21                              | 0.40                         |                              |
| 17,527                                   |                              | 0.22                         |
| 21,302                                   | 0.41                         | 0.23                         |
| 23,666                                   |                              |                              |
| 30,173                                   |                              |                              |
| 40,082                                   |                              |                              |
| 50,294                                   |                              |                              |
| 55,165                                   | 0.44                         | 0.26                         |
| 66,663                                   |                              |                              |
| 70,083                                   |                              |                              |
| 90,093                                   |                              |                              |
| 106,477                                  |                              |                              |
| 120,247                                  |                              |                              |
| 145,021                                  |                              |                              |
| 173,091                                  | 0.48                         | 0.26                         |
| 183,877                                  |                              |                              |

often  however,  the  more recalcitrant  cases  are  those  in which the zero  entry  only  for some one parameter is found and substitute data  are sought    for  both   the + and  the -case. Here we have recourse to the fact that  it  is possible to compute the  apparent  effect of the missing parameter from all of  the    pertinent  data  in  the signature    table,  on  the assumption of  linearity.  The program  therefore   computes a correlation  coefficient  for  this  parameter alone  and uses this with the  found  signature data. Admittedly this is a very dangerous form of extrapolation since it completely ignores all nonlinear  effects, but  it is often the only recourse.

## Signature  table  learning  results

The results of the best signature table learning run made to date  are shown  in  Table 2. This particular run was arranged to yield  comparable  figures for    both    the  newer  signature table  procedure  and  the older  linear  polynomial procedure. Because of the great amount of machine  time  required (approximately 10  hours per run) it has  not yet been possible to optimize  (1) the choice of  parameters  to be  used, (2) the range of values to be assigned to these parameters, (3) the specific  assignments of parameters to signature types, (4) the

detailed hierarchical  structure of the signature  tables,  (5) the table sizes and (6) the various smoothing techniques which must be  used during the early learning phases.

Table 2 reports the apparent goodness  of play  based  upon a correlation factor defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L is the  accumulated count  of  all available moves which the program rates lower than its rating for the book recommended  move and H is the accumulated count of all available moves  which the  program  rates  higher  than  or equal to its rating for the book recommended  move. During  this learning  run the program looked ahead only a single ply  except in those cases    where jumps  were    pending.  The observed correlation coefficients are fairly good measures of the  goodness of the evaluation procedures without minimaxing.  Coefficients  were computed during the run both by using the signature table procedure and by the older linear polynomial procedure. These    figures  are tabulated  in    the second and third columns  against the total number of moves in column one. It will    be  observed that the coefficient for the polynomial procedure appears to stabilize at a figure of 0.26 after about 50,000 moves,  while the coefficient for the signature table procedure continues to rise and finally after perhaps 175,000 moves  reaches  a limit of  0.48.  Interestingly enough  the  signature-table coefficient  was  always larger than the polynomial coefficient  even  during the very early stage although a detailed  analysis on a move-by-move  basis, which cannot be  easily reproduced here, did show that the signature  table method was the more erratic of the two during this stage.

It should be noted that these linear polynomial  results  are not directly comparable with the coefficients for individual terms as reported in Table 1,  since for Table 1  the H values used  in  computing the C's did not include  those moves rated equal to the book move  while in  Table 2 equals  are  included, and the computed coefficients are correspondingly lower. The discrepancy  is particularly  marked with respect  to those parameters  which  are  usually  zero for  most  moves but which    may    be    extremely valuable for  their differentiating ability when  they  do depart from zero. Most of the terms with  high  coefficients  in Table  1 have  this  characteristic. Furthermore,  when    mini-maxing    was required during the two tests it was  based  on different criteria, for  Table 1  on  the linear polynomial and for Table 2 on signature tables.

The results of Table 2 seem to indicate that the signature table procedure is superior to the linear polynomial procedure even    in  its presently unoptimized form. It would    be nice    if  one could measure this improvement in some more precise  way, making a correct allowance for the difference in the computation times.

Perhaps a better way to assess the goodness of the play using signature tables is to list the fraction of  the time that the program rates 0, then 1, 2, 3, etc.  moves as equal to  or higher  than  its  rating  of  the  book  recommended  move. Typical figures are tabulated below,  measured  for a test lot of  895 representative  moves after the program had learned by analyzing 173,989 book moves:

moves higher or equal 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 fractional  times found  0.38  0.26  0.16 0.10 0.06  0.03  0.01

In view  of  the high probability of occurrence  of two equally acceptable moves, the sum of  the figures in   the  first two columns, namely  0.64,  is a reasonable estimate of the fraction  of time that the program would make an acceptable move without look-ahead  and  mini-maxing. Look-ahead greatly play  and  accounts for the difference between this prediction and the observed fact that the playing program tends to follow  book-recommended  moves a much  higher fraction of the time.

## Introduction of strategies

The chief  defect  of the program in the recent past, according to several  checker masters, seems to have  been  its failure to maintain any fixed    strategy  during play. The good player during his  own  play  will note that a given board situation is favorable to him in some one respect and perhaps unfavorable in some second  respect,  and he  will  follow  some fairly consistent policy for several  moves in a row. In general he will try to maintain his advantage and at the same time to overcome the  unfavorable aspect. In  doing  this  he  may more or  less  ignore  other secondary  properties  which, under different    circumstances, might  themselves    be dominant. The program, as described, treats each board situation as a new problem. It is true  that  this procedure does not allow the  program  to  exploit those  human  failings  of the  opponent that might have been  revealed  by the earlier play or to conduct a war of  nerves intended to trick the opponent. Such actions have little place in games of  complete information and can well  be ignored.8

What may certainly be questioned is the failure to take account of the initial board situation in setting the goals to be  considered during  the  look-ahead  process.  Were the

anonymous reviewer  who  quite rightly pointed out  that  it would  be  desirable This statement can be questioned and, in fact, has been questioned by an for the program  to be  able to define what is called 'deep objectives,' and, more importantly, to be able to detect such 'deep objectives'  on the part of a human opponent. The reviewer  went  on  to say in part  ''the  good player will sometimes define a 'deep  objective' and maneuver toward that point.  He is always on the lookout for possibilities  which  will  help  him to get the better of  the opponent. The opponent, unaware of  his true objective until  too late, does not  defend adequately and loses.-It is most  helpful to him  to know that his opponent is  not  also playing a similar 'deep  game.' I believe that the 'practical indeterminacy' of  checkers makes  the  technique of  'deep'  objectives  by good players quite feasible. Indeed, I don't  doubt the  technique is part  of  the basic equipment of  any champion player, however inarticulately he may describe  it. This is perhaps the reason Hellman did better in the games by  mail.  He bad  time  to study out appropriately  'deep' objectives and then to realize them.  This is also  what checker masters have in mind when    they criticize  the program's  failure to maintain any fixed strategy during play.'

This ooint of view finds suooort in the observation that those master ularers whd have defeated the computer have all asked searching questions rehold the program in awe and generally fail  to  make any attempt  to  undergarding  the  program,  while  good  players who fail  to  win  usually  seem to stand  it.

This opens up what may be a fruitful line for additional research.

program  able to  do  this, then it could adopt a strategy for any  particular  move.  If  the program finally made a move that was consistent with this strategy, and if the opponent were unable to  vitiate this strategy, then the program would, on the next move, again  tend to adopt  the  same strategy. Of course, if the program  had been unable to maintain an advantage  by  following its  initial  strategy,  it  might  now find  that  a  different strategy  was indicated  and    it  would therefore change its strategy. Nevertheless, on  the  average, the program might follow a given strategy for several moves in a row and so exhibit playing characteristics that would give the impression of  long  range planning.

A possible mechanism for introducing  this  kind of strategic planning is provided  by the signature  table    procedure and by the plausibility analysis. It is only necessary to view the different signature types as different strategic elements and  to alter  the  relative weights assigned to the different signature types as a result  of  the plausibility analysis of  the initial  board  situation. For this to be effective, some care must  be given to  the  groupings of the parameters into  the signature types  so that these signature types tend  to correspond to recognizable strategic concepts. Fortunately, the same initial-level grouping of  parameters that  is indicated by  interdependency considerations  seems to be reasonable in  terms of strategies. We conclude that  it is quite feasible to introduce  the  concept of strategy in  this restricted way.

For reasons of symmetry, it seems desirable to pick two signature types for emphasis, that  one yielding the highest positive value and  that  one yielding  the most negative value for the  most  plausible move found during the initial plausibility  analysis. This    procedure  recognizes the fact  that   to the  opponent,  the  signs are reversed and his strongest signature type will be the  first  player's weakest one and vice versa. The simplest way to emphasize a particular strategy is to  multiply the resulting values found  for  the two selected signature types by some  arbitrary  constant before entering a  subsequent    stage  of  the analysis. A factor  of 2 (with  a limit on  the maximum resulting value so as  not to exceed the table range) seemed reasonable  and this has been used for most of the experiments to date.

The results to date have been disappointing,  presumably because of the ineffectual arrangement of terms into usable strategic groups,  and  as  a consequence, this  method of introducing strategies has been temporarily abandoned.

## Conclusions

While the goal outlined in Ref.  1,  that  of getting the program to generate its own parameters,  remains  as  fzr in the future as it seemed to be in 1959,  we can conclude that techniques are now in hand  for dealing with many of  the tree pruning  and  parameter  interaction problems  which  were certainly much less  well understood at  the time of  the  earlier paper.  Perhaps  with these newer tools we may  be able to apply  machine  learning  techniques  to  many  problems  of economic importance  without  waiting for the long-sought ultimate solution.

## Acknowledgments

These studies were largely carried out while the writer was at  the  Thomas J. Watson Research Laboratories of the  IBM Corporation,  and while  he  was  a  Visiting  Professor at M.I.T. More recently, the work has been supported in part by  Stanford  University  and  by  the  Advance  Research Projects Agency of  the Office    of  the Secretary  of  Defense (SD-183). The  IBM  Corporation has  continued to aid  the work by supplying time on  an  IBM 7094 computer at their San  Jose  Development  Laboratories.    Many individuals have contributed to these studies, and in  particular,  Arnold Griffith  of  M.I.T.  deserves commendation    for suggesting the initial form of the signature  table  procedure. The continuing interest and cooperation of the officers and playermembers  of  the  American  Checker  Federation  has been most helpful.

Received June 5, 1967.

i

I