## TD-Gammon, A  Self-Teaching Backgammon Program, Achieves Master-Level Play

Gerald Tesauro IBM  Thomas J.  Watson Research Center P.  O.  Box  704

Yorktown Heights, NY  10598

(tesauro@watson.ibm.com)

Abstract. TD-Gammon is a neural network that is able to teach itself to  play  backgammon solely by  playing against itself and  learning from  the  results, based  on the  TD(A)  reinforcement learning algorithm (Sutton,  1988).  Despite  starting  from random  initial  weights  (and hence  random  initial  strategy),  TD-Gammon  achieves  a surprisingly strong  level  of play.  With  zero  knowledge  built  in  at  the  start  of learning (i.e.  given only  a  "raw"  description of  the  board  state), the network  learns  to  play  at  a strong  intermediate level.  Furthermore, when  a set  of  hand-crafted features is added  to  the  network's  input representation, the  result is  a  truly  staggering level  of  performance: the  latest  version of  TD-Gammon is now  estimated to  play  at  a  strong master level  that  is  extremely close  to  the  world's best  human  players.

Reinforcement learning  is a fascinating  and  challenging alternative  to the more standard approach  to training neural networks  by supervised  learning. Instead  of training  on a "teacher  signal"  indicating  the correct  output  for every  input, reinforcement  learning  provides  less information  to work with: the learner  is only given a "reward" or "reinforcement"  signal indicating the quality of output. In many cases the reward is also delayed, i.e., is given at the end of a long sequence of inputs and outputs. In contrast to the  numerous  practical  successes  of supervised,  learning,  there  have been relatively  few successful  applications  of reinforcement  learning  to complex real-world  problems.

This paper  presents  a case  study  in which  the  TD()~)  reinforcement learning  algorithm  (Sutton,  1988)  was  applied  to training  a multilayer  neural  network on a complex task: learning strategies for the game of backgammon. This is an attractive test problem due to its considerable  complexity and stochastic  nature.  It is also possible  to make a detailed  comparison  of TD learning  with the alternative  approach  of supervised  training  on human expert examples; this was the approach used in the development  of Neurogammon, a program  that convincingly  won the backgammon  championship  at the 1989 International Computer Olympiad (Tesauro, 1989).

Details of the TD backgammon learning system are described elsewhere (Tesauro,  1992).  In brief,  the  network  observes  a sequence  of board  positions

xl,  x2,  ...,  xf  leading to a final  reward  signal  z determined by the  outcome  of the game. (These games were played without doubling,  thus the network did not learn  anything  about  doubling  strategy.)  The sequences  of positions  were generated  using  the network's predictions  as an evaluation  function.  In other words, the move selected  at each time step was the move that maximized  the network's estimate of expected outcome. Thus the network learned based on the outcome  of self-play.  This procedure  of letting  the network  learn from its own  play was  used even at the very start  of learning,  when the network's initial  weights  are  random,  and  hence  its  initial  strategy  is  a random  strategy. From an a priori point of view,  this methodology  appeared  unlikely to produce  any sensible learning,  because  random strategy  is exceedingly  bad, and because the games end up taking an incredibly long time: with random play on both sides, games often last several  hundred  or even several  thousand time steps. In contrast, in normal human play games usually last on the  order  of  50-60  time  steps.

Preliminary  experiments used an input representation scheme that only encoded the raw board information (the number of White or Black checkers at each location),  and  did not utilize  any additional  pre-computed  features relevant to good  play,  such  as,  e.g.,  the  strength  of a blockade or probability of being  hit.  These  experiments  were completely  knowledge-free in that there was no initial knowledge built in about how to play good backgarmnon. In subsequent experiments, a set of hand-crafted features was added to the representation, resulting  in higher  overall  performance. This  feature  set  was the same set that was included in Neurogammon.

The rather  surprising  result,  after  tens of thousands  of training  games, was that a significant  amount of learning  actually took place, even in the zero initial  knowledge  experiments.  These  networks  achieved  a strong intermediate  level of play approximately  equal to that of Neurogammon.  The networks with hand-crafted features have greatly surpassed Neurogalmnon and all other previous computer programs, and have continued to improve with more and more games of training experience. The best of these networks is now estimated to play at a strong master level that is extremely close to equaling world-class human play. This has been demonstrated in numerous tests of TD-Gammon  in play against several world-class  human grandmasters,  including  Bill Robertie  and Paul Magriel,  both noted  authors and highly respected  former World Champions.  For the tests  against humans, a heuristic doubling algorithm was added to the program which took TDGalmnon's  equity estimates  as input, and tried to apply  somewhat classical formulas developed in the 1970's (Zadeh and Kobliska, 1977) to determine proper  doubling  actions.

Results  of testing are summarized  in table 1. TD-Gammon  1.0, which had a total  training  experience  of 300,000  games,  lost  a total  of 13 points  in 51 games against  Robertie,  Magriel,  and Malcolm  Davis,  the l lth  highest  rated player in the world in 1991. TD-Gammon 2.0, which had 800,000 games of training games of experience and was publicly exhibited  at the 1992 World Cup of Backgammon tournament,  had a net loss of 7 points in 38 exhibition

Table  1: Results  of testing  TD-Gammon  in play  against  world-class human  opponents. Version  1.0  used  l-ply  search  for  move  selection; versions  2.0  and  2.1 used  2-ply  search.  Version  2.0  had 40  hidden units; versions 1.0  and  2.1  had  80  hidden units.

| Program        | Training Games   | Opponents                                        | Results                     |
|----------------|------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| TD-Gammon 1.0  | 300,000          | Robertie, Davis, Magriel                         | -13 pts/51 games (-.25 ppg) |
| TD- Gammon 2.0 | 800,000          | Goulding, Woolsey, Snellings, Russell, Sylvester | -7 pts/ 38 games (-.18 ppg) |
| TD-Gammon 2.1  | 1,500,000        | Robertie                                         | -1 pt/40 games (-.02ppg)    |

games against top players Kent Goulding, Kit Woolsey, Wilcox Snellings, former World Cup Champion Joe Sylvester, and former World Champion Joe Russell.  The  latest  version  of  the  program, version  2.1,  had  1.5  million  games of training  experience  and  achieved  near-parity to Bill  Robertie  in a recent 40-game  test session:  after  trailing  the  entire  session,  Robertie  managed  to eke out  a narrow  one-point  victory  by the score  of 40 to 39.

According  to an article  by Bill Robertie  published  in Inside  Backgammon magazine  (Robertie,  1992),  TD-Gammon's  level  of play is significantly  better than any previous computer program. Robertie estimates  that TD-Gammon 1.0  would  lose  on  average  in  the  range  of 0.2  to  0.25  points  per  game  against world-class  human  play.  (This is consistent  with the results  of the 51-game sample.) This would be about equivalent to a decent advanced level of human play in local  and regional  Open-division  tournaments.  In contrast,  most commercial  programs play at a weak intermediate  level that loses well over one point per game against world-class  humans. The best previous conmlercial program  scored -0.66 points  per game on this scale. The best previous program of any sort was Hans Berliner's BKG program, which in its only public appearance in 1979 won a short match against the World Champion at that time (Berliner, 1980). BKG was about equivalent to a very strong intermediate  or weak advanced player and would have scored in the range of -0.3  to -0.4  points  per  game.

Based  on the  latest  40-game  sample,  Robertie's  overall  assessment  is that TD-Gammon 2.1 now plays at a strong master level that is extremely close to equaling the world's best human players. In fact, due to the program's steadiness  (it never  gets tired  or careless,  as even the  best of humans  inevitably  do), he thinks it would actually  be the favorite  against  any human player  in a long money-game  session  or in a grueling  tournament  format such as the World Cup competition.

The  only  thing  which  prevents  TD-Gammon  from  genuinely  equaling world-class human  play  is  that  it  still  makes  minor,  practically  inconsequen-

tial technical  errors in its endgame  play.  One would expect  these  technical errors to cost the program  on the order of .05 points per game against  top humans. Robertie thinks that there are probably only two or three dozen players  in the entire world who, at the top of their game,  could expect to hold their own or have an advantage  over the program. This means that TDGa:mnon is now probably as good at backgammon as the grandmaster chess machine  Deep  Thought  is  at  chess.  Interestingly enough,  it is only  in the  last 5-10 years that human play has gotten good enough to rival TD-Gammon's current playing ability. If TD-Gammon had been developed 10 years ago, Robertie  says,  it would  have easily  been  the best  player  in the  world  at  that time. Even 5 years  ago, there would  have been only two or three players  who could  equal  it.

The self-teaching  reinforcement  learning approach used in the developmeat of TD-Gammon has greatly surpassed the supervised learning approach of Neurogammon, and has achieved a level of play considerably beyond any possible  prior  expectations. It has  also demonstrated favorable  empirical  behavior  of TD(A),  such  as  good  scaling  behavior, despite  the  lack  of  theoretical guarantees.

Prospects for further improvement of TD-Gammon seem promising. Based on the  observed  scaling,  training  larger  and  larger  networks  with correspondingly more experience would probably result in even higher levels of performance. Additional improvements could come from modifications of the training  procedure  or the input representation  scheme.  Some combination  of these factors  could easily result in a version  of TD-Galmnon  that would  be the uncontested  world's best backgalmnon  player.

However, instead  of merely  pushing TD-Gammon  to higher and higher levels  of play, it now seems more worthwhile  to extract  the principles  underlying the success of this application  of TD learning, and to determine what kinds of other applications  may Mso produce similar successes. Other possible  applications might  include financial  trading  strategies, military battlefield  strategies, and  control  tasks  such  as  robot  motor  control,  navigation and path planning. At this point we are still largely ignorant as to why TD-Gammon is able to learn so well. One plausible conjecture is that the stochastic  nature  of the task is criticM  to the success  of TD learning.  One possibly  very  important  effect  of the  stochastic  dice  rolls  in  backgaimnon  is that during learning,  they enforce  a certain  minimum  amount of exploration of the  state  space.  By  stochastically forcing  the  system  into  regions  of  state space  that  the  current  evaluation flmction  tries  to avoid,  it is possible  that improved  evaluations  and new strategies  can be discovered.

## References

- H. Berliner,  "Computer  backgammon." Scientific  American 243:1, 64-72 (1980).
- B. Robertie, "Carbon versus silicon: matching wits with TD-Gammon." Inside Backgammon 2:2, 14-22 (1992).
- R. S. Sutton,  "Learning  to predict  by the  methods  of temporal  differences." Machine Learning 3, 9-44 (1988).
- G. Tesauro,  "Neurogammon wins  Computer  Olympiad." Neural  Computation 1,321-323  (1989).
- G. Tesauro, "Practical issues in temporal difference learning." Machine Learning 8, 257-277  (1992).
- N. Zadeh  and G. Kobliska,  "On optimal  doubling  in backgan~non." Management Science 23, 853-858  (1977).