## Animal Intelligence

## An Experimental Study  of  the  Associate Processes in  .Animals

E.  L.  Thorndike should  today  class  an animal  among  the 'worms.' To give  to the  word  a positive value  and several definite possibilities of  meaning is  one aim of  this investigation.

II

T his  monograph is  an attempt at  an explanation of the  nature of  the  process of  association in  the  animal mind. Inasmuch as there  have been no extended researches of  a  character similar to  the  present one  either in  subject-matter or  experimental method,  it is  necessary to  explain briefly its standpoint.

Our knowledge  of  the  mental  life of  animals  equals in  the  main  our  knowledge  of  their sense-powers, of  their instincts or  reactions performed  without  experience, and of  their reactions which are  built up by experience. Confining our  attention to  the  latter we find  it the  opinion  of the  better observers and analysts that these  reactions can all  be explained by the  ordinary  associative processes without  aid  from abstract, conceptual, inferential thinking.  These associative processes then,  as  present in  animals' minds  and  as  displayed in  their acts, are  my subjectmatter. Any  one familiar in  even  a general way with  the literature of  comparative psychology  will  recall that this part  of the field has received  faulty and unsuccessful treatment. The careful, minute,  and solid knowledge of the  sense-organs of  animals  finds  no counterpart in  the realm  of  associations and habits. We  do not  know  how delicate or  how complex  or  how permanent  are  the  possible  associations of  any given  group  of  animals. And  although one would be rash who  said  that  our present equipment  of  facts about  instincts was sufficient or  that our  theories about  it were surely  sound,  yet  our  notion of  what  occurs when a  chick  grabs  a  worm  are  luminous and infallible compared to  our  notion  of  what happens when a  kitten runs  into the  house  at  the  familiar call. The reasons  that they  have satisfied us as  well  as  they  have is  just  that  they  are so vague.  We say that  the  kitten associates the  sound 'kitty kitty' with  the  experience of nice  milk  to  drink, which does  very  well  for  a commonsense  answer.  It  also  suffices as a rebuke  to  those  who would have  the  kitten ratiocinate about  the  matter, but  it fails to  tell what real mental  content is  present. Does the kitten feel  "sound of  call, memory-image of  milk  in  a saucer  in  the  kitchen, thought  of  running  into the  house, a feeling, finally, of 'I  will  run in'?" Does he perhaps feel only  the  sound  of  the  bell and an impulse  to  run  in, similar in  quality to  the  impulses  which make  a tennis player run  to  and  fro  when playing? The word association may cover  a multitude of  essentially different processes, and  when a  writer attributes anything that an  animal  may do  to  association his  statement has  only  the  negative value of  eliminating reasoning on the  one  hand and  instinct on the  other. His position is  like  that  of a zoologist who

The importance  to  comparative psychology  in  general of  a more scientific account  of  the  association-process  in  animals is  evident. Apart  from  the  desirability of knowing all  the facts we  can,  of whatever  sort, there is  the  especial consideration that  these  associations and consequent habits have  an  immediate  import for  biological  science. In the higher  animals  the  bodily  life and preservative acts  are  largely directed by these  associations, They, and not instinct, make  the  animal  use the best  feeding grounds,  sleep in  the  same lair, avoid  new dangers  and  profit by  new changes  in  nature. Their  higher development  in  mammals  is  a  chief factor in  the  supremacy  of  that group. This, however,  is a  minor  consideration. The main purpose  of  the  study  of  the  animal  mind is  to learn  the  development  of  mental  life down  through  the phylum,  to  trace in  particular the  origin of  human faculty. In  relation to  this chief purpose  of  comparative psychology  the  association processes assume  a  role predominant over  that  of  sense-powers or  instinct, for  in  a study  of the  associative processes lies the  solution of  the  problem. Sense-powers and  instincts have  changed  by  addition and supersedence, but  the  cognitive side  of  consciousness has changed  not  only  in  quantity but  also in  quality. Somehow out  of  these associative processes have  arisen human consciousness with  their sciences and  arts and  religions. The association of ideas  proper,  imagination, memory, abstraction, generalization, judgment,  inference, have  here their source. And in  the  metamorphosis the  instincts, impulses, emotions  and sense-impressions have  been  transformed  out  of  their old  natures. For  the  origin and  development of  human faculty we must  look  to  these processes of  association in  lower  animals. Not only  then  does  this department need treatment more,  but  promises  to  repay the  worker  better.

Although  no work done in  this field is  enough like the  present investigation to  require an account  of  its results, the method hitherto in  use  invites comparison  by its  contrast and,  as I believe, by its  faults. In the  first place, most of  the  books do not  give  us a psychology, but  rather a eulogy, of  animals. They have  all been  about

Editor's note. This  excerpt is  reprinted from "Animal Intelligence: An  Experimental Study of  the  Associate Processes in  Animals,"  by E.  L.  Thorndike, 1898, Psychological Review  Monograph  Supplement, 2(4), 1-8.

the  representative of  the  cat-mind in  all the  books.  The unconscious  distortion of the facts is  almost  harmless compared  to  the  unconscious neglect of  an  animal' s  mental  life until it  verges  on the  unusual  and marvelous. It is  as  if some denizen  of  a planet where communication was  by thought-transference, who  was  surveying  humankind and  reporting their psychology, should  be  oblivious  to  all our  inter-communication save  such  as  the  psychical-research society has noted.  If  he should  further misinterpret the  cases  of  mere coincidence of  thoughts as facts  comparable to telepathic communication,  he would not  be more wrong than  some of  the  animal  psychologists. In  short, the  anecdotes give  really the abnormal or super-normal psychology  of  animals.

Further, it  must be confessed that  these  vices  have been  only  ameliorated, not  obliterated, when the  observation  is  first-hand, is  made  by the  psychologist himself. For as men  of  the  utmost  scientific skill have failed to prove  good  observers in  the  field of  spiritualistic phenomena, 1  so  biologists and  psychologists before the  pet  terrier or hunted fox often  become,  like  Samson  shorn.  They, too,  have  looked  for  the  intelligent and unusual  and neglected the  stupid and normal.

animal intelligence, never  about  animal stupidity. Though a writer derides the  notion  that animals  have  reason, he hastens to  add  that they  have  marvelous  capacity of  forming associations, and is  likely to refer to the  fact  that human beings  only  rarely reason  anything out,  that their trains of  ideas  are  ruled  mostly  by association, as  if, in this  latter, animals  were on par  with  them.  The history of  books  on animals' minds  thus  furnishes an  illustration of  the  well-nigh universal tendency  in  human  nature  to find  the  marvelous  wherever  it can.  We  wonder that the stars are  so  big  and so far  apart, that  the  microbes  are so small  and so thick  together, and for  much  the  same reason  wonder at  the  things animals  do.  They used  to  be wonderful  because  of  the  mysterious, God-given  faculty of  instinct, which could  almost  remove mountains. More lately they  have  been  wondered at  because  of  their marvelous  mental  powers in  profiting by experience. Now imagine  an astronomer tremendously eager  to  prove  the stars as  big  as  possible, or  a bacteriologist whose great scientific desire is to  demonstrate the  microbes to  be  very, very  little! Yet  there has  been  a similar eagerness on the part  of many  recent  writers on animal psychology  to praise the  abilities of  animals. It  cannot  help  leading to partiality in  deductions from facts and more especially in  the  choice of  facts for investigation. How  can  scientists who  write  like  lawyers, defending  animals  against the charge  of  having  no power of  rationality, be at  the  same time  impartial judges  on the  bench? Unfortunately the real  work in  this field has  been done in  this  spirit. The level-headed thinkers who  might  have  won  valuable resuits have  contented themselves with  arguing  against the theories of  the  eulogists. They have not  made investigations of  their own.

In the  second  place  the  facts have generally been derived from  anecdotes. Now  quite apart from  such  pedantry  as  insists that a man's  word about  a scientific fact is  worthless unless  he is  a trained scientist, there  are really in this  field special objections to  the  acceptance of the  testimony  about  animals' intelligent acts  which one gets  from  anecdotes. Such testimony is  by  no means on a par  with  testimony about  the  size  of  a fish or  the migration  of birds, etc.  For here  one has to deal  not merely  with ignorant or inaccurate testimony, but also with  prejudiced testimony. Human  folk  are  as a matter of  fact eager  to  find  intelligence in  animals. They like to. And when the  animal  observed is  a  pet  belonging to  them or  their friends, or  when  the  story is  one that has  been told  as as story  to  entertain, further complications are introduced. Nor is  this all. Besides  commonly misstating what facts  they  report, they  report only such facts  as show the  animal  at  his  best. Dogs get  lost hundreds  of times  and no one ever  notices it  or  sends  an account  of it to  a  scientific magazine.  But let one find his  way from Brooklyn  to  Yonkers and the  fact immediately  becomes a circulating anecdote. Thousands of  cats  on thousands of occasions  sit  helplessly yowling,  and no one takes thought  of  it or writes  to  his  friend, the  professor; but let one cat  claw at  the  knob of  a door  supposedly as a signal  to  be let  out,  and straightway this  cat  becomes

Finally, in  all  cases, whether  of  direct observation or  report by good observers or  bad,  there have  been  three other  defects. Only a single case  is  studied, and so the results are  not  necessarily true  for the  type; the  observation is  not  repeated, nor  are  the  conditions perfectly regulated; the  previous  history of  the  animal  in  question is now  known. Such observations may  tell us,  if  the  observer is  perfectly reliable, that a  certain thing takes place, but  they cannot  assure us  that it will take  place universally among  the  animals  of  that  species, or universally with the  same animal. Nor can  the  influence of  previous experience  be estimated. All  this  refers to  means of  getting knowledge about  what animals  do.  The next  question is, "What do they feel?" Previous  work has  not  furnished an answer or the  material for  an answer to this  more important question. Nothing  but  carefully designed, crucial experiments can.  In  abandoning  the  old  method one ought  to  seek  above  all to  replace it  by one which will not  only  tell more accurately what  they  do, and give  the much-needed  information how they do it, but  also  inform us what  they feel while  they  act.

To remedy these  defects experiment must  be  substituted  for  observation and the collection of anecdotes. Thus you immediately  get  rid  of several of  them.  You can  repeat the  conditions at  will, so  as  to  see  whether  or not  the  animal's behavior is  due to  mere coincidence. A number of  animals  can  be subjected to  the  same test, so as to attain typical results. The animal  may  be put in situations where its  conduct is especially instructive.

l  I  d o  not  mean  that  scientists have been too  credulous with  regard  to spiritualism, but  am referring to  the  cases where ten  or  twenty  scientists have been sent  to observe  some  trick-performance by a spiritualistic 'medium,'  and have all been absolutely confident that  they  understood the  secret of its performance, each of  them giving  a totally different explanation.

After  considerable preliminary observation of  animals' behavior under  various conditions, I  chose  for my general method one  which,  simple as  it is, possesses several other marked advantages besides those  which accompany experiment  of  any sort. It  was merely  to  put  animals  when hungry in  enclosures from which they  could  escape  by some simple  act, such  as  pulling at  a  loop  of  cord, pressing  a  lever, or  stepping on  a  platform. (A detailed description  of  these  boxes and pens will  be given  later.) The animal  was put  in  the  enclosure, food was left outside in  sight, and his  actions observed. Besides  recording his general  behavior, special notice  was  taken  of how  he succeeded  in doing the necessary  act  (in  case  he did succeed), and a record  was kept  of  the  time  that he was in  the  box  before performing the  successful pull, or  clawing,  or bite. This was  repeated  until  the animal had formed a perfect association between the  sense-impression  of  the  interior of  that box and the  impulse  leading to  the  successful movement. When  the  association was thus  perfect, the  time taken  to escape  was, or course, practically constant and very  short.

If, on the  other hand,  after a certain time  the  animal did  not  succeed, he was taken  out,  but not  fed. If, after a sufficient number of trials, he failed to get  out,  the case  was recorded  as one of  complete  failure. Enough different sorts of  methods of  escape  were tried to  make it  fairly sure  that  association in  general, not  association of  a  particular sort of  impulse, was being  studied. Enough animals  were  taken  with  each  box or  pen  to  make it sure that  the  results were not  due to  individual peculiarities. None of  the  animals used  had any  previous acquaintance with any of  the  mechanical  contrivances by which the doors  were opened.  So far as  possible the  animals  were kept  in  a uniform  state of  hunger,  which was practically utter hunger.  That  is, no cat  or  dog was experimented on when the  experiment involved any  important question of fact or  theory, unless  I  was sure  that his  motive  was of the  standard strength. With chicks  this is  not  practicable, on account  of  their delicacy. But with them dislike of loneliness acts  as a uniform  motive  to  get  back to  the other  chicks. Cats (or  rather kittens), dogs and chicks were  the  subjects of  the  experiments. All  were  apparently in  excellent health, save  an occasional chick.

functions and  permit them to  be  carefully observed. One may, by following it, observe personally more intelligent acts  than  are  included in  any anecdotal collection. And this  actual vision  of  animals  in the  act  of  using  their minds is  far  more fruitful than  any amount of  histories of  what animals  have done without  the  history of  how they  did it. But besides  affording this  opportunity for purposeful and  systematic observation, our  method  is valuable  because  it  frees the  animal  from any influence of the  observer. The animal's behavior is  quite independent of  any  factors save  its own hunger, the  mechanism of  the box it  is  in,  the  food  outside, and such general  matters as fatigue, indisposition, etc.  Therefore the  work done by  one  investigator may be  repeated and  verified or  modified by another. No personal factor is  present save  in  the observation and interpretation. Again our method gives some very  important results which are  quite uninfluenced by any personal  fact  in  any way. The curves  showing the  progress of  the  formation of  associations, which are obtained from  the  records of  the times  taken by  the  animal in  successive trials, are  facts which may be obtained by any observer who  can tell time.  They are  absolute, and whatever  can  be deduced  from  them is  sure. So also  the question  of whether  an animal  does or does not form a certain association requires for  an answer no higher qualification in the observer  than a pair  of eyes.  The literature of  animal  psychology shows so  uniformally and often so  sadly the  influence of  the  personal equation that any method which can partially eliminate it  deserves a trial.

By this method of  experimentation the  animals  are put in situations which call  into  activity their  mental

Furthermore, although  the  associations formed are such as could  not  have  been previously experienced or provided  for  by heredity, they  are  still not  too  remote from the  animal's ordinary courses  of  life. They mean simply  the  connection  of a certain act  with a certain situation and resultant pleasure, and this general type  of association is  found throughout  the animal's life normally. The muscular  movements required are  all such  as might  often be  required of  the  animal. And yet  it will be noted  that  the  acts  required are  nearly enough like  the acts of  the  anecdotes to  enable one  to  compare  the  results of  experiment by this method with  the  work of  the  anecdote  school. Finally, it  may  be noticed that  the  method lends  itself readily to  experiments on imitation.