Figure 2.4.6 Illustration of deterministic rollout with selective depth lookahead. After k steps of the algorithm, we have a trajectory that starts at the initial state x 0 and ends at state x k . We then generate the set of all possible next states (states x 1 k +1 , x 2 k +1 , x 3 k +1 , x 4 k +1 in the figure). We 'evaluate' these states using the base heuristic, and select some of them for 'expansion,' i.e., we generate their next states x k +2 , evaluate them using the base heuristic, and continue. In the end we have a selective depth tree of next states, and the base heuristic costs from the leaves of the tree. The state x k +1 that corresponds to smallest overall cost is chosen by the selective depth lookahead rollout algorithm. For problems with a large number of stages, we can also truncate the rollout trajectories and add a terminal cost function approximation as compensation for the resulting error; cf. Fig. 2.4.5.

<!-- image -->

of rollout are restricted to deterministic problems, and tend to be problemdependent. We will not consider them further in this book.

## 2.4.2 Stochastic Rollout and Monte Carlo Tree Search

We will now discuss the extension of the rollout algorithm to stochastic problems with a finite number of states. We will restrict ourselves to the case where the base heuristic is a policy π = { µ 0 , . . . , µ N -1 } (i.e., is sequentially consistent, in the context of deterministic problems). It is possible to consider more general rollout algorithms that involve base heuristics with

a sequential improvement property, but we will not pursue this idea, as it does not seem to have been applied so far in interesting stochastic contexts.

We first note that the cost improvement property that we showed for deterministic problems under the sequential consistency condition carries through for stochastic problems. In particular, let us denote by J k,π ( x k ) the cost corresponding to starting the base policy at state x k , and by J k, ˜ π ( x k ) the cost corresponding to starting the rollout algorithm at state x k . We claim that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We prove this inequality by induction similar to the deterministic case. Clearly it holds for k = N , since J N, ˜ π = J N,π = g N . Assuming that it holds for index k +1, we have for all x k ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where:

- (a) The first equality is the DP equation for the rollout policy ˜ π .
- (b) The first inequality holds by the induction hypothesis.
- (c) The second equality holds by the definition of the rollout algorithm.
- (d) The third equality is the DP equation for the policy π that corresponds to the base heuristic.

The induction proof of the cost improvement property (2.27) is thus complete.

Similar to deterministic problems, it has been observed empirically that for stochastic problems the rollout policy not only does not deteriorate the performance of the base policy, but also typically produces substantial cost improvement; see the case studies referenced at the end of the chapter.

## Simulation-Based Implementation of the Rollout Algorithm

A conceptually straightforward way to compute the rollout control at a given state x k and time k is to consider each possible control u k ∈ U k ( x k ) and to generate a 'large' number of simulated trajectories of the system starting from ( x k , u k ). Thus a simulated trajectory has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where { µ k +1 , . . . , µ N -1 } is the tail portion of the base policy, the first generated state is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the disturbance sequences { w k , . . . , w N -1 } are independent random samples. The costs of the trajectories corresponding to a pair ( x k , u k ) can be viewed as samples of the Q-factor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J k +1 , ˜ π is the cost-to-go function of the base policy, i.e., J k +1 , ˜ π ( x k +1 ) is the cost of using the base policy starting from x k +1 . For problems with a large number of stages, it is also common to truncate the rollout trajectories and add a terminal cost function approximation as compensation for the resulting error.

By Monte Carlo averaging of the costs of the sample trajectories plus the terminal cost (if any), we obtain an approximation to the Q-factor Q k ( x k , u k ) for each control u k ∈ U k ( x k ), which we denote by ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ). We then compute the (approximate) rollout control ˜ µ k ( x k ) with the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Example 2.4.2 (Backgammon)

The first impressive application of rollout was given for the ancient two-player game of backgammon, in the paper by Tesauro and Galperin [TeG96]; see Fig. 2.4.7. They implemented a rollout algorithm, which attained a level of play that was better than all computer backgammon programs, and eventually better than the best humans. Tesauro had proposed earlier the use of one-step and two-step lookahead with lookahead cost function approximation provided by a neural network, resulting in a backgammon program called TDGammon [Tes89a], [Tes89b], [Tes92], [Tes94], [Tes95], [Tes02]. TD-Gammon was trained with the use of the TD( λ ) algorithm that will be discussed in Section 4.9, and was used as the base heuristic (for both players) to simulate game trajectories. The rollout algorithm also involved truncation of long game trajectories, using a terminal cost function approximation based on TD-Gammon. Game trajectories are of course random, since they involve the use of dice at each player's turn. Thus the scores of many trajectories have to be generated and Monte Carlo averaged to assess the probability of a win from a given position.

An important issue to consider here is that backgammon is a two-player game and not an optimal control problem that involves a single decision maker. While there is a DP theory for sequential zero-sum games, this theory has not been covered in this book. Thus how are we to interpret rollout algorithms in the context of two-player games? The answer is to treat the two players unequally: one player uses the heuristic policy exclusively (TDGammon in the present example). The other player takes the role of the

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Av. Score by

Monte-Carlo

Simulation

Possible Moves

898 888 8

Figure 2.4.7 Illustration of rollout for backgammon. At a given position and roll of the dice, the set of all possible moves is generated, and the outcome of the game for each move is evaluated by 'rolling out' (simulating to the end) many games using a suboptimal/heuristic backgammon player (the TDGammon player was used for this purpose in [TeG96]), and by Monte-Carlo averaging the scores. The move that results in the best average score is selected for play.

<!-- image -->

optimizer, and tries to improve on the heuristic policy (TD-Gammon) by using rollout. Thus 'policy improvement' in the context of the present example means that when playing against a TD-Gammon opponent, the rollout player achieves a better score on the average than if he/she were to play with the TD-Gammon strategy. In particular, the theory does not guarantee that a rollout player that is trained using TD-Gammon for both players will do better than TD-Gammon would against a non-TD-Gammon opponent. This is a plausible hypothesis, albeit one that can only be tested empirically.

Most of the currently existing computer backgammon programs descend from TD-Gammon. Rollout-based backgammon programs are the most powerful in terms of performance, consistent with the principle that a rollout algorithm performs better than its base heuristic. However, they are too time-consuming for real-time play, because of the extensive on-line simulation requirement at each move (the situation in backgammon is exacerbated by its high branching factor, i.e., for a given position, the number of possible successor positions is quite large, as compared for example with chess). They have been used in a limited diagnostic way to assess the quality of neural networkbased programs (many articles and empirical works on computer backgammon are posted on-line; see e.g., http://www.bkgm.com/articles/page07.html).

## Monte Carlo Tree Search

In the rollout implementation just described, we implicitly assumed that once we reach state x k , we generate the same large number of trajectories starting from each pair ( x k , u k ), with u k ∈ U ( x k ), to the end of the horizon. The drawback of this is threefold:

- (a) The trajectories may be too long because the horizon length N is large (or infinite, in an infinite horizon context).

- (b) Some of the controls u k may be clearly inferior to others, and may not be worth as much sampling effort.
- (c) Some of the controls u k that appear to be promising, may be worth exploring better through multistep lookahead.

This has motivated variants, generally referred to as Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS for short), which aim to trade off computational economy with a hopefully small risk of degradation in performance. Variants of this type involve, among others, early discarding of controls deemed to be inferior based on the results of preliminary calculations, and simulation that is limited in scope (either because of a reduced number of simulation samples, or because of a shortened horizon of simulation, or both).

In particular, a simple remedy for (a) above is to use rollout trajectories of reasonably limited length, with some terminal cost approximation at the end (in an extreme case, the rollout may be skipped altogether, i.e., rollout trajectories have zero length). The terminal cost function may be very simple (such as zero) or may be obtained through some auxiliary calculation. In fact the base policy used for rollout may be the one that provides the terminal cost function approximation, as noted for the rollout-based backgammon algorithm of Example 2.4.2.

A simple but less straightforward remedy for (b) is to use some heuristic or statistical test to discard some of the controls u k , as soon as this is suggested by the early results of simulation. Similarly, to implement (c) one may use some heuristic to increase the length of lookahead selectively for some of the controls u k . This is similar to the selective depth lookahead procedure for deterministic rollout that we illustrated in Fig. 2.4.6.

The MCTS approach can be based on sophisticated procedures for implementing and combining the ideas just described. The implementation is often adapted to the problem at hand, but the general idea is to use the interim results of the computation and statistical tests to focus the simulation effort along the most promising directions. Thus to implement MCTS one needs to maintain a lookahead tree, which is expanded as the relevant Q-factors are evaluated by simulation, and which balances the competing desires of exploitation and exploration (generate and evaluate controls that seem most promising in terms of performance versus assessing the potential of inadequately explored controls). Ideas that were developed in the context of multiarmed bandit problems have played an important role in the construction of this type of MCTS procedures (see the end-ofchapter references).

## Example 2.4.3 (Statistical Tests for Adaptive Sampling with a One-Step Lookahead)

Let us consider a typical one-step lookahead selection strategy that is based on adaptive sampling. We are at a state x k and we try to find a control ˜ u k

-Factors Current State

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Simulation Nearest Neighbor Heuristic Move to the Right

Figure 2.4.8 Illustration of one-step lookahead MCTS at a state x k . The Q-factor sampled next corresponds to the control i with minimum sum of exploitation index (here taken to be the running average Q i,n ) and exploration index ( R i,n , possibly given by the UCB rule).

<!-- image -->

that minimizes an approximate Q-factor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

over u k ∈ U k ( x k ), by averaging samples of ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ). We assume that U k ( x k ) contains m elements, which for simplicity are denoted 1 , . . . , m . At the /lscript th sampling period, knowing the outcomes of the preceding sampling periods, we select one of the m controls, say i /lscript , and we draw a sample of ˜ Q k ( x k , i /lscript ), whose value is denoted by S i /lscript . Thus after the n th sampling period we have an estimate Q i,n of the Q-factor of each control i = 1 , . . . , m that has been sampled at least once, given by where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash

Thus Q i,n is the empirical mean of the Q-factor of control i (total sample value divided by total number of samples), assuming that i has been sampled at least once.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After n samples have been collected, with each control sampled at least once, we may declare the control i that minimizes Q i,n as the 'best' one, i.e., the one that truly minimizes the Q-factor Q k ( x k , i ). However, there is a positive probability that there is an error: the selected control may not minimize the true Q-factor. In adaptive sampling, roughly speaking, we want to design the sample selection strategy and the criterion to stop the sampling, in a way that keeps the probability of error small (by allocating some sampling effort to all controls), and the number of samples limited (by not wasting samples on controls i that appear inferior based on their empirical mean Q i,n ).

Intuitively, a good sampling policy will balance at time n the desires of exploitation and exploration (i.e., sample controls that seem most promising, in the sense that they have a small running average Q i,n , versus assessing the potential of inadequately explored controls, those i that have been sampled a small number of times). Thus it makes sense to sample next the control i that minimizes the sum

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of two indexes: an exploitation index T i,n and an exploration index R i,n . Usually the exploitation index is chosen to be the empirical mean Q i,n . The exploration index is based an a confidence interval formula and depends on the sample count

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of control i . A frequently suggested choice is the UCB rule (upper confidence bound), which sets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c is a positive constant that is selected empirically (some analysis suggests values near c = √ 2, assuming that Q i,n is normalized to take values in the range [ -1 , 0]). The UCB rule, first proposed in the paper [ACF02], has been extensively discussed in the literature both for one-step and for multistep lookahead [where it is called UCT (UCB applied to trees; see [KoS16])]. Its justification is based on probabilistic analyses that relate to the multiarmed bandit problem, and is beyond our scope.

Sampling policies for MCTS with multistep lookahead are based on similar sampling ideas to the case of one-step lookahead. A simulated trajectory is run from a node i of the lookahead tree that minimizes the sum T i,n + R i,n of an exploitation index and an exploration index. There are many schemes of this type, but the details are beyond our scope (see the end-of-chapter references).

A major success has been the use of MCTS in two-player game contexts, such as the AlphaGo computer program (Silver et al. [SHM16]), which performs better than the best humans in the game of Go. This program integrates several of the techniques discussed in this chapter, and in Chapters 3 and 4, including MCTS and rollout using a base policy that is trained off-line using a deep neural network. We will discuss neural network training techniques in Chapter 3. The AlphaZero program, which has performed spectacularly well against humans and other programs in the games of Go and chess (Silver et al. [SHS17]), bears some similarity with AlphaGo, and critically relies on MCTS, but does not use rollout.

## Randomized Policy Improvement by MCTS

We have described rollout and MCTS as schemes for policy improvement: start with a base policy, and compute an improved policy based on the results of one-step lookahead or multistep lookahead followed by simulation with the base policy. We have implicitly assumed that both the base policy and the rollout policy are deterministic in the sense that they map each state x k into a unique control ˜ µ k ( x k ) [cf. Eq. (2.31)]. In some contexts, success has been achieved with randomized policies , which map a state x k to a probability distribution over the set of controls U k ( x k ), rather than mapping onto a single control. In particular, the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs use MCTS to generate and use for training purposes randomized policies, which specify at each board position the probabilities with which the various moves are selected.

A randomized policy can be used as a base policy in exactly the same way as a deterministic policy: for a given state x k , we just generate sample trajectories and associated sample Q-factors, starting from each leaf-state of the lookahead tree that is rooted at x k . We then average the corresponding Q-factor samples. However, the rollout/improved policy, as we have described it, is a deterministic policy, i.e., it applies at x k the control ˜ µ k ( x k ) that is 'best' according to the results of the rollout [cf. Eq. (2.31)]. Still, however, if we wish to generate an improved policy that is randomized, we can simply change the probabilities of different controls in the direction of the deterministic rollout policy. This can be done by increasing the probability of the 'best' control ˜ µ k ( x k ) from its base policy level, while decreasing the probabilities of the other controls.

The use of MCTS provides a related method to 'improve' a randomized policy. In the process of adaptive simulation that is used in MCTS, we generate frequency counts of the different controls, i.e., the proportion of rollout trajectories associated each u k ∈ U k ( x k ). We can then obtain the rollout randomized policy by moving the probabilities of the base policy in the direction suggested by the frequency counts, i.e., increase the probability of high-count controls and reduce the probability of the others. This type of policy improvement is reminiscent of gradient-type methods, and has been successful in a number of applications; see Section 4.11 for further discussion, and the end-of-chapter references for such policy improvement implementations in AlphaGo, AlphaZero, and other application contexts.

## Variance Reduction in Rollout - Comparing Advantages

When using simulation, sampling is often organized to effect variance reduction . By this we mean that for a given problem, the collection and use of samples is structured so that the variance of the simulation error is made smaller, with the same amount of simulation effort. There are several

methods of this type for which we refer to textbooks on simulation (see, e.g., Ross [Ros12], Rubinstein and Kroese [RuK17]).

In this section we discuss a method to reduce the effects of the simulation error in the calculation of the Q-factors in the context of rollout. The key idea is that the selection of the rollout control depends on the values of the Q-factor differences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all pairs of controls ( u k , ˆ u k ). These values must be computed accurately, so that the controls u k and ˆ u k can be accurately compared. On the other hand, the simulation/approximation errors in the computation of the individual Q-factors ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ) may be magnified through the preceding differencing operation.

An alternative approach is possible in the case where the probability distribution of each disturbance w k does not depend on x k and u k . In this case, we may approximate by simulation the Q-factor difference ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ) -˜ Q k ( x k , ˆ u k ) by sampling the difference

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w k = ( w k , w k +1 , . . . , w N -1 ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where { µ k +1 , . . . , µ N -1 } is the tail portion of the base policy.

This approximation may be far more accurate than the one obtained by differencing independent samples C k ( x k , u k , w k ) and C k ( x k , ˆ u k , ˆ w k ). Indeed, by introducing the zero mean sample errors

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it can be seen that the variance of the error in estimating ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ) -˜ Q k ( x k , ˆ u k ) with the former method will be smaller than with the latter method if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or equivalently

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e., if and only if the correlation between the errors D k ( x k , u k , w k ) and D k ( x k , ˆ u k , w k ) is positive. A little thought should convince the reader that this property is likely to hold in many types of problems. Roughly speaking, the relation (2.32) holds if changes in the value of u k (at the first stage) have little effect on the value of the error D k ( x k , u k , w k ) relative to the effect induced by the randomness of w k . To see this, suppose that there exists a scalar γ &lt; 1 such that, for all x k , u k , and ˆ u k , there holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for the first inequality we use the generic relation ab ≥ a 2 -| a |·| b -a | for two scalars a and b , for the second inequality we use the generic relation | a | · | b | ≥ -1 2 ( a 2 + b 2 ) for two scalars a and b , and for the third inequality we use Eq. (2.33).

Thus, under the assumption (2.33) and the assumption

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the condition (2.32) holds and guarantees that by averaging cost difference samples rather than differencing (independently obtained) averages of cost samples, the simulation error variance decreases.

Let us finally note the potential benefit of using Q-factor differences in contexts other than rollout. In particular when approximating Q-factors Q k ( x k , u k ) using parametric architectures (Section 3.4 in the next chapter), it may be important to approximate and compare instead the differences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The function A k ( x k , u k ) is also known as the advantage of the pair ( x k , u k ), and can serve just as well as Q k ( x k , u k ) for the purpose of comparing controls, but may work better Q k ( x k , u k ) in the presence of approximation errors. This question is discussed further in Section 3.4.

## 2.5 ON-LINE ROLLOUT FOR DETERMINISTIC INFINITESPACES PROBLEMS - OPTIMIZATION HEURISTICS

We have considered so far discrete-spaces applications of rollout, where the relevant Q-factors at each state x k are evaluated by simulation and compared by exhaustive comparison. To implement this approach in a continuous-spaces setting, the control constraint set must first be discretized, which is often inconvenient and ineffective. In this section we will discuss an alternative approach for deterministic problems that can deal with an infinite number of controls and Q-factors at x k without discretization. The idea is to use a base heuristic that involves a continuous optimization , and to rely on a nonlinear programming method to solve the corresponding lookahead optimization problem.

To get a sense of the basic idea, consider the one-step lookahead rollout minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ) is the approximate Q-factor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with H k +1 ( x k +1 ) being the cost of the base heuristic starting from state x k +1 [cf. Eq. (2.25)]. Suppose that we have a differentiable closed-form expression for H k +1 , and the functions g k and f k are known and are differentiable with respect to u k . Then the Q-factor ˜ Q k ( x k , u k ) of Eq. (2.35) is also differentiable with respect to u k , and its minimization (2.34) may be addressed with one of the many gradient-based methods that are available for differentiable unconstrained and constrained optimization.

The preceding approach requires that the heuristic cost H k +1 ( x k +1 ) be available in closed form, which is highly restrictive, but this difficulty can

-Factors Current State

Current State

Figure 2.5.1 Schematic illustration of rollout for a deterministic problem with infinite control spaces. The base heuristic is an ( /lscript -1)-stage deterministic optimal control problem, which together with the k th stage minimization over u k ∈ U k ( x k ), seamlessly forms an /lscript -stage continuous spaces optimal control/nonlinear programming problem that starts at state x k .

<!-- image -->

be circumvented by using a base heuristic that is itself based on multistep optimization . In particular, suppose that H k +1 ( x k +1 ) is the optimal cost of some ( /lscript -1)-stage deterministic optimal control problem that is related to the original problem. Then the rollout algorithm (2.34)-(2.35) can be implemented by solving the /lscript -stage deterministic optimal control problem, which seamlessly concatenates the first stage minimization over u k [cf. Eq. (2.34)], with the ( /lscript -1) -stage minimization of the base heuristic ; see Fig. 2.5.1. This /lscript -stage problem may be solvable on-line by standard continuous spaces nonlinear programming or optimal control methods. An important example of methods of this type arises in control system design and is discussed next.

## 2.5.1 Model Predictive Control

We will consider a classical control problem, where the objective is to keep the state of a deterministic system close to the origin of the state space or close to a given trajectory. This problem has a long history, and has been addressed by a variety of sophisticated methods. Starting in the late 50s and early 60s, approaches based on state variable system representations and optimal control became popular. The linear-quadratic approach, which we have illustrated by example in Section 1.3.7, was developed during this period, and is still used extensively. Unfortunately, however, linear-

Fixed obstacles

Velocity constraints

A

Mobile obstacles

Acceleration

Figure 2.5.2 Illustration of constrained motion of a robot from point A to point B. There are state (position/velocity) constraints, and control (acceleration) constraints. When there are mobile obstacles, the state constraints may change unpredictably, necessitating on-line replanning.

<!-- image -->

quadratic models are often not satisfactory. There are two main reasons for this:

- (a) The system may be nonlinear, and it may be inappropriate to use for control purposes a model that is linearized around the desired point or trajectory.
- (b) There may be control and/or state constraints, which are not handled adequately through quadratic penalty terms in the cost function. For example, the motion of a robot may be constrained by the presence of obstacles and hardware limitations (see Fig. 2.5.2). The solution obtained from a linear-quadratic model may not be suitable for such a problem, because quadratic penalties treat constraints 'softly' and may produce trajectories that violate the constraints.

These inadequacies of the linear-quadratic model have motivated a methodology, called model predictive control (MPC for short), which combines elements of several ideas that we have discussed so far: multistep lookahead, rollout with infinite control spaces, and certainty equivalence. Aside from resolving the difficulty with infinitely many Q-factors at x k , while dealing adequately with state and control constraints, MPC is wellsuited for on-line replanning, like all rollout methods.

We will focus primarily on the most common form of MPC, where the system is either deterministic, or else it is stochastic, but it is replaced with a deterministic version by using typical values in place of the uncertain quantities, similar to the certainty equivalent control approach. Moreover we will consider the case where the objective is to keep the state close to the origin; this is called the regulation problem . Similar approaches have been developed for the problem of maintaining the state of a nonstationary

system along a given state trajectory, and also, with appropriate modifications, to control problems involving disturbances.

In particular, we will consider a deterministic system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose state x k and control u k are vectors that consist of a finite number of scalar components. The cost per stage is assumed nonnegative

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(e.g., a quadratic cost). We impose state and control constraints

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also assume that the system can be kept at the origin at zero cost, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a given initial state x 0 ∈ X 0 , we want to obtain a sequence { u 0 , u 1 , . . . } such that the states and controls of the system satisfy the state and control constraints with small total cost.

## The MPC Algorithm

Let us describe the MPC algorithm for the deterministic problem just described. At the current state x k :

- (a) MPC solves an /lscript -step lookahead version of the problem, which requires that x k + /lscript = 0.
- (b) If { ˜ u k , . . . , ˜ u k + /lscript -1 } is the optimal control sequence of this problem, MPC applies ˜ u k and discards the other controls ˜ u k +1 , . . . , ˜ u k + /lscript -1 .
- (c) At the next stage, MPC repeats this process, once the next state x k +1 is revealed.

In particular, at the typical stage k and state x k ∈ X k , the MPC algorithm solves an /lscript -stage optimal control problem involving the same cost function and the requirement x k + /lscript = 0. This is the problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

subject to the system equation constraints

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the state and control constraints

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the terminal state constraint

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let { ˜ u k , ˜ u k +1 , . . . , ˜ u k + /lscript -1 } be a corresponding optimal control sequence. The MPC algorithm applies at stage k the first component ˜ u k of this sequence, and discards the remaining components; see Fig. 2.5.3. †

To guarantee that there is an integer /lscript such that the preceding MPC algorithm is feasible, we assume the following.

## Constrained Controllability Condition

There exists an integer /lscript &gt; 1 such that for every initial state x k ∈ X k , we can find a sequence of controls u k , . . . , u k + /lscript -1 that drive to 0 the state x k + /lscript of the system at time k + /lscript , while satisfying all the intermediate state and control constraints

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finding an integer /lscript that satisfies the constrained controllability condition is an important issue to which we will return later. † Generally the constrained controllability condition tends to be satisfied if the control constraints are not too stringent, and the state constraints do not allow a large deviation from the origin. In this case not only we can implement MPC, but also the resulting closed-loop system will tend to be stable; see the following discussion of stability, and Example 2.5.2.

Note that the actual state trajectory produced by MPC may never reach the origin (see the subsequent Example 2.5.1). This is because we use only the first control ˜ u k of the k th stage sequence { ˜ u k , ˜ u k +1 , . . . , ˜ u k + /lscript -1 } ,

† In the case, where we want the system to follow a given nominal trajectory, rather than stay close to the origin, we should modify the MPC optimization to impose as a terminal constraint that the state x k + /lscript should be a point on the nominal trajectory (instead of x k + /lscript = 0). We should also change the cost function to reflect a penalty for deviating from the given trajectory.

† In the case where we want the system to follow a given nominal trajectory, rather than stay close to the origin, we may want to use a time-dependent lookahead length /lscript k , to exercise tighter control over critical parts of the nominal trajectory.

-Factors Current State

Current State

<!-- image -->

Sample Q-Factors Simulation Control 1 Control 2 Control 3

1)-Stages Base Heuristic Minimization

Figure 2.5.3 Illustration of the problem solved by MPC at state x k . We minimize the cost function over the next /lscript stages while imposing the requirement that x k + /lscript = 0. We then apply the first control of the optimizing sequence.

which aims at x k + /lscript = 0. At the next stage k +1 the control generated by MPC may be different than ˜ u k +1 , because it will aim one step further to the terminal condition x k + /lscript +1 = 0.

To make the connection of MPC with rollout, we note that the onestep lookahead function ˜ J implicitly used by MPC [cf. Eq. (2.37)] is the cost-to-go function of a certain base heuristic . This is the heuristic that drives to 0 the state after /lscript -1 stages ( not /lscript stages ) and keeps the state at 0 thereafter, while observing the state and control constraints, and minimizing the associated ( /lscript -1) stages cost, in the spirit of our earlier discussion; cf. Fig. 2.5.1.

## Sequential Improvement Property and Stability Analysis

It turns out that the base heuristic just described is sequentially improving, so MPC has a cost improvement property, of the type discussed in Section 2.4.1. To see this, let us denote by ˆ J k ( x k ) the optimal cost of the /lscript -stage problem solved by MPC when at a state x k ∈ X k . Let also H k ( x k ) and H k +1 ( x k +1 ) be the optimal heuristic costs of the corresponding ( /lscript -1)stage optimization problems that start at x k and x k +1 , and drive the states x k + /lscript -1 and x k + /lscript , respectively, to 0. Thus, by the principle of optimality, we have the DP equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since having one less stage at our disposal to drive the state to 0 cannot decrease the optimal cost, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By combining the preceding two relations, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the sequential improvement condition for the base heuristic [cf. Eq. (2.29)]. †

Often the primary objective in MPC, aside from fulfilling the state and control constraints, is to obtain a stable closed-loop system, i.e., a system that naturally tends to stay close to the origin. This is typically expressed adequately by the requirement of a finite cost over an infinite number of stages:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where { x 0 , u 0 , x 1 , u 1 , . . . } is the state and control sequence generated by MPC.

We will now show that the stability condition (2.39) is satisfied by the MPC algorithm. Indeed, from the sequential improvement condition (2.38), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Adding this relation for all k in a range [0 , K ], where K = 0 , 1 , . . . , we obtain

Since H K +1 ( x K +1 ) ≥ 0, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and taking the limit as K →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[ H 0 ( x 0 ) is finite because the transfer from x 0 to x /lscript = 0 is feasible by the constrained controllability condition]. We have thus verified the stability condition (2.39).

† Note that the base heuristic is not sequentially consistent, as it fails to satisfy the definition given in Section 2.4.1 (see the subsequent Example 2.5.1).

## Example 2.5.1

Consider a scalar linear system and a quadratic cost

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the state and control constraints are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We apply the MPC algorithm with /lscript = 2. For this value of /lscript , the constrained controllability assumption is satisfied, since the 2-step sequence of controls

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

drives the state x 2 to 0, for any x 0 with | x 0 | ≤ 1 . 5.

At state x k ∈ X k , MPC minimizes the two-stage cost

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

subject to the control constraints

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the state constraints

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is a quadratic programming problem, which can be solved with available software, and in this case analytically, because of its simplicity. In particular, it can be verified that the minimization yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the MPC algorithm selects ˜ u k = -2 3 x k , which results in the closed-loop system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash

Note that while this closed-loop system is stable, its state is never driven to 0 if started from x 0 = 0. Moreover, it is easily verified that the base heuristic is not sequentially consistent. For example, starting from x k = 1, the base heuristic generates the sequence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while starting from the next state x k +1 = 1 3 it generates the sequence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so the sequential consistency condition of Section 2.4.1 is violated.

Regarding the choice of the horizon length /lscript for the MPC calculations, note that if the constrained controllability assumption is satisfied for some value of /lscript , it is also satisfied for all larger values of /lscript . This argues for a large value of /lscript . On the other hand, the optimal control problem solved at each stage by MPC becomes larger and hence more difficult as /lscript increases. Thus, the horizon length is usually chosen on the basis of some experimentation: first ensure that /lscript is large enough for the constrained controllability assumption to hold, and then by further experimentation to ensure overall satisfactory performance.

## 2.5.2 Target Tubes and the Constrained Controllability Condition

We now return to the constrained controllability condition, which asserts that the state constraint sets X k are such that starting from anywhere within it, it is possible to drive to 0 the state of the system within some number of steps /lscript , while staying within X m at each intermediate step m = k + 1 , . . . , m = k + /lscript -1. Unfortunately, this assumption masks some major complications. In particular, the control constraint set may not be sufficiently rich to compensate for natural instability tendencies of the system. As a result it may be impossible to keep the state within X k over a sufficiently long period of time, something that may be viewed as a form of instability. Here is an example.

## Example 2.5.2

Consider the scalar linear system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is unstable, and the control constraint

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then if 0 ≤ x 0 &lt; 1, it can be seen that by using the control u 0 = -1, the next state satisfies,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and is closer to 0 than the preceding state x 0 . Similarly, using controls u k = -1, every subsequent state x k +1 will get closer to 0 that x k . Eventually, after a sufficient number of steps ¯ k , with controls u k = -1 for k &lt; ¯ k , the state x ¯ k will satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Once this happens, the feasible control u ¯ k = -2 x ¯ k will drive the state x ¯ k +1 to 0.

/lscript

Figure 2.5.4 Illustration of state trajectories under MPC for Example 2.5.2. If the initial state lies within the set ( -1 , 1) the constrained controllability condition is satisfied for sufficiently large /lscript , and the MPC algorithm yields a stable controller. If the initial state lies outside this set, MPC cannot be implemented because the constrained controllability condition fails to holds. Moreover, the system is unstable starting from such an initial state. In this example, the largest reachable tube is { X,X,... } with X = { x | | x | ≤ 1 } .

<!-- image -->

Similarly, when -1 &lt; x 0 ≤ 0, by applying control u k = 1 for a sufficiently large number of steps ¯ k , the state x ¯ k will be driven into the region [ -1 / 2 , 0], and then the feasible control u ¯ k = -2 x ¯ k will drive the state x ¯ k +1 to 0.

Suppose now that the control constraint is | u k | ≤ 1 and the state constraint is of the form X k = [ -β, β ] for all k , and let us explore what happens for different values of β . The preceding discussion shows that if 0 &lt; β &lt; 1 the constrained controllability assumption is satisfied, and for every state initial state x 0 ∈ X 0 the state can be kept within X k and can be driven to 0 in a finite number /lscript of steps. The number /lscript depends on β , and in particular if 0 &lt; β &lt; 1 / 2, /lscript can be taken equal to 1.

On the other hand, if β ≥ 1, it is impossible to drive the state to 0 from every initial state x 0 ∈ [1 , β ] without violating the constraint | u k | ≤ 1, so the constrained controllability assumption is violated. In fact if the initial state satisfies | x 0 | &gt; 1, the state trajectory diverges in the sense that | x k | → ∞ for any control sequence that satisfies the constraint | u k | ≤ 1; see Fig. 2.5.4. Thus if β ≥ 1, either a larger control constraint set or an initial condition that is close to 0, or both, are needed to satisfy the constrained controllability condition and to improve the stability properties of the closed-loop system.

The critical construction in the preceding example is to identify sets of states X k ⊂ X k such that starting from within X k we are guaranteed to stay within the 'tube' { X k +1 , X k +2 , . . . , X N } for all subsequent times with appropriate choices of control. Tubes of this type can serve as state constraints in MPC. Moreover, when the sets X k are bounded, a guarantee

that the state can stay within the tube amounts to a form of closed-loop stability guarantee . In the remainder if this section, we will address the issue of how such tubes can be constructed.

Formally, a tube { X 0 , X 1 , . . . , X N } is just a sequence of subsets with X k ⊂ X k for all k = 0 , . . . , N . The tube is called reachable if it has the property that for every k and x k ∈ X k there exists a u k ∈ U k ( x k ) such that f k ( x k , u k ) ∈ X k +1 . A reachable tube was also called an effective target tube in [Ber71], and for simplicity it will be called a target tube in this section; the latter name is widely used in the current literature. † If the original tube of state constraints { X 0 , X 1 , . . . , X N } is not reachable, the constrained controllability condition cannot be satisfied, since then there will be states outside the tube starting from which we can never reenter the tube. In this case, it is necessary to compute a reachable tube to use as a set of state constraints in place of the original tube { X 0 , X 1 , . . . , X N } . Thus obtaining a reachable tube is a prerequisite towards satisfying the constrained controllability assumption, and serves as the first step in the analysis and design of MPC schemes with state constraints.

Given an N -stage deterministic problem with state constraints x k ∈ X k , k = 0 , . . . , N , we can obtain a reachable tube { X 0 , X 1 , . . . , X N } by a recursive algorithm that starts with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and generates X k , k = 0 , . . . , N -1, going backwards,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Generally, it is difficult to compute the sets X k of the reachable tube, but algorithms that produce inner approximations have been constructed. The author's thesis [Ber71] and subsequent papers [BeR71], [Ber72], [BeR73], [Ber07], gave inner ellipsoidal approximations for both finite and infinite horizon problems with perfect and partial state information, which involve linear systems and ellipsoidal constraints. Other authors have developed polyhedral approximations; see the textbook by Borelli, Bemporad, and Morari [BBM17].

† The concept of target tubes and reachability in discrete-time systems was introduced in the author's 1971 Ph.D. thesis ([Ber71], available on-line) and associated papers [BeR71], [Ber72], [BeR73], where various methods for constructing target tubes were given, for both deterministic and minimax/game problems, including easily characterized ellipsoids for linear systems. Reachability can be defined for finite horizon as well as infinite horizon problems. Reachability concepts were studied by several authors much later, particularly in the context of MPC, and have been generalized to continuous-time systems (see the end-ofchapter references).

## Example 2.5.2 (continued)

Here if the state constraints are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the tube { X k | k = 0 , . . . , N } is reachable for any N . However, this is not true for the constraint sets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For example for x 0 = 2 the next state x 1 = 2 x 0 + u k = 4 + u k will not satisfy | x 1 | ≤ 2 for any of the feasible controls u k with | u k | ≤ 1. Thus it is necessary to replace the tube of original constraints { X k | k = 0 , . . . , N } with a reachable tube { X k | k = 0 , . . . , N } . It can be verified that the largest tube that is reachable for any value of N is the one with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Calculating a reachable tube is relatively easy for one-dimensional problems, but becomes complicated for multidimensional problems, where approximations are required in general.

Finally, let us consider the case of the quadratic cost per stage

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and MPC implemented with /lscript = 2. As noted earlier, in order for the MPC minimizations to be feasible for /lscript = 2, the initial condition must satisfy | x 0 | ≤ 1. A calculation very similar to the one of Example 2.5.1 shows that MPC applies at time k the control ˜ u k = -(5 / 3) x k . The state of the closedloop system evolves according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and tends to 0 asymptotically.

Note that there is a subtle difference between reachability of the tube { X k | k = 0 , . . . , N } and satisfying the constrained controllability condition. The latter implies the former, but the converse is not true, as the preceding example illustrates. In particular, if X k is given by Eq. (2.42), the tube is reachable, but the constrained controllability assumption is not satisfied because starting at the boundary of X k , we cannot drive the state to 0 in any number of steps, using controls u k with | u k | ≤ 1. By contrast, if we remove from X k the boundary points 1 and -1, the tube is still reachable while the constrained controllability condition is satisfied. Generally, except for boundary effects of this type, tube reachability typically implies the constrained controllability condition.

## 2.5.3 Variants of Model Predictive Control

The MPC scheme that we have described is just the starting point for a broad methodology with many variations, which often relate to the suboptimal control methods that we have discussed so far in this chapter. For example, in the problem solved by MPC at each stage, instead of the requirement of driving the system state to 0 in /lscript steps, one may use a large penalty for the state being nonzero after /lscript steps. Then, the preceding analysis goes through, as long as the terminal penalty is chosen so that the sequential improvement condition (2.38) is satisfied.

In another variant, instead of aiming to drive the state to 0 after /lscript steps, one aims to reach a sufficiently small neighborhood of the origin, within which a stabilizing controller, designed by other methods, may be used.

We finally mention variants of MPC methods, which combine rollout and terminal cost function approximation, and which can deal with uncertainty and system disturbances. A method of this type will be described in Section 4.6.1 in the context of infinite horizon problems, but can be adapted to finite horizon problems as well; see also the end-of-chapter references.

As an illustration, let us provide an example of a scheme that combines MPC with certainty equivalent control ideas (cf. Section 2.3.2).

## Example 2.5.3 (MPC for Stochastic Systems and Certainty Equivalent Approximation)

Consider the stochastic system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the expected cost of a policy π = { µ 0 , . . . , µ N -1 } starting at x 0 defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

cf. the framework of Section 1.2. We assume that for all k , there are state and control constraints of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and that the stochastic disturbances w k take values within some known set W k .

An important characteristic of this problem is that a policy must maintain reachability of the tube { X 0 , X 1 , . . . } , even under worst-case disturbance values. For this it is necessary that for each state x k ∈ X k , the control u k is chosen from within the subset ˜ U k ( x k ) given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that ˜ U k ( x k ) is nonempty for all x k ∈ X k and is somehow available. This is not automatically satisfied; similar to the deterministic case discussed earlier, the target tube { X 0 , X 1 , . . . } must be properly constructed using reachability methods, the sets U k ( x k ) must be sufficiently 'rich' to ensure that this is possible, and the sets ˜ U k ( x k ) must be computed.

We will now describe a rollout/MPC method that generalizes the one given earlier for deterministic problems. It satisfies the state and control constraints, and uses assumed certainty equivalence to define the base policy over /lscript -1 steps, where /lscript &gt; 1 is some integer. In particular, at a given state x k ∈ X k , this method first fixes the disturbances w k +1 , . . . , w k + /lscript -1 to some typical values. It then applies the control ˜ u k that minimizes over u k ∈ ˜ U k ( x k ) the Q-factor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the minimization over u k ∈ ˜ U k ( x k ) of the Q-factor (2.43) can be implemented by optimizing over sequences { u k , u k +1 , . . . , u k + /lscript -1 } an /lscript -stage deterministic optimal control problem. This is the problem that seamlessly concatenates the first stage minimization over u k [cf. Eq. (2.43)] with the ( /lscript -1)-stage minimization of the base heuristic. Consistent with the general rollout approach of this section, it may be possible to address this problem with gradient-based optimization methods.

where H k +1 ( x k +1 ) is the optimal cost of the deterministic transfer from x k +1 to 0 in /lscript -1 steps with controls ˜ u m from the sets ˜ U m ( x m ), m = k +1 , . . . , k + /lscript -1, and with the disturbances fixed at their typical values. Here we require a constrained controllability condition that guarantees that this transfer is possible.

A drawback of the MPC method of the preceding example is that it may not be well suited for on-line implementation because of the substantial amount of computation required at each state x k . An alternative is to introduce approximation in policy space on top of approximation in value space ; cf. Section 2.1.5. To this end, we can generate a large number of sample states x s k , s = 1 , . . . , q , and calculate the corresponding controls u s k using the Q-factor minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[cf. Eq. (2.43)]. We can then use the pairs ( x s k , u s k ), s = 1 , . . . , q , and some form of regression to train a Q-factor parametric architecture ˜ Q k ( x k , u k , ¯ r k ) such as a neural network [cf. the approximation in policy space approach of Eq. (2.6)]. Once this is done, the MPC controls can be generated on-line using the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

cf. Eq. (2.7). This type of approximation in policy space approach may be applied more broadly in MPC methods where the on-line computational requirements are excessive.

## 2.6 NOTES AND SOURCES

Approximation in value space has been considered in an ad hoc manner since the early days of DP, motivated by the curse of dimensionality. The idea was reframed and coupled with model-free simulation methods that originated in the late 1980s in artificial intelligence. Since that time, approximation in value space has been one of the two pillars of approximate DP/RL. The other pillar is approximation in policy space, which was discussed briefly in Section 2.1.4 and will be revisited in Section 4.11.

The problem approximation approach has a long history in optimal control and operations research. The author's paper [Ber07] describes a few enforced decomposition schemes based on constraint relaxation. The book [Ber17], Section 6.2.1, provides some additional examples from flexible manufacturing and multiarmed bandit problems; see also the thesis by Kimemia [Kim82], and the papers by Kimemia, Gershwin, and Bertsekas [KGB82], and Whittle [Whi88].

The main idea of rollout algorithms, obtaining an improved policy starting from some other suboptimal policy, has appeared in several DP application contexts. The name 'rollout' was coined by Tesauro in specific reference to rolling the dice in the game of backgammon [TeG96]. In Tesauro's proposal, a given backgammon position is evaluated by 'rolling out' many games starting from that position, using a simulator, and the results are averaged to provide a 'score' for the position; see Example 2.4.2. The use of the name 'rollout' has gradually expanded beyond its original context; for example the samples collected through simulated trajectories are referred to as 'rollouts' by some authors.

The application of rollout algorithms to discrete deterministic optimization problems, and the notions of sequential consistency, sequential improvement, fortified rollout, and the use of multiple heuristics (also called 'parallel rollout') were given in the paper by Bertsekas, Tsitsiklis, and Wu [BTW97], and also in the neuro-dynamic book by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [BeT96]. Rollout algorithms for stochastic problems were further formalized in the papers by Bertsekas [Ber97b], and Bertsekas and Castanon [BeC99]. A discussion of rollout algorithms as applied to network optimization problems may be found in the author's textbook [Ber98].

For more recent work on rollout algorithms and related methods, see Secomandi [Sec00], [Sec01], [Sec03], Ferris and Voelker [FeV02], [FeV04], McGovern, Moss, and Barto [MMB02], Savagaonkar, Givan, and Chong [SGC02], Bertsimas and Popescu [BeP03], Guerriero and Mancini [GuM03], Tu and Pattipati [TuP03], Wu, Chong, and Givan [WCG03], Chang, Givan, and Chong [CGC04], Meloni, Pacciarelli, and Pranzo [MPP04], Yan, Diaconis, Rusmevichientong, and Van Roy [YDR04], Besse and Chaib-draa [BeC08], Sun et al. [SZL08], Bertazzi et al. [BBG13], Sun et al. [SLJ13], Tesauro et al. [TGL13], Beyme and Leung [BeL14], Goodson, Thomas, and Ohlmann [GTO15], Li and Womer [LiW15], Mastin and Jaillet [MaJ15],

Huang, Jia, and Guan [HJG16], Simroth, Holfeld, and Brunsch [SHB15], and Lan, Guan, and Wu [LGW16]. For a recent survey by the author, see [Ber13b]. These works discuss a broad variety of applications and case studies, and generally report positive computational experience.

The idea of rollout that uses limited lookahead, adaptive pruning of the lookahead tree, and cost function approximation at the end of the lookahead horizon was suggested by Tesauro and Galperin [TeG96] in the context of backgammon. Related ideas appeared earlier in the paper by Abramson [Abr90], in a game playing context. The paper and monograph by Chang, Hu, Fu, and Marcus [CFH05], [CFH13] proposed and analyzed adaptive sampling in connection with DP, including statistical tests to control the sampling process. The name 'Monte Carlo tree search' (Section 2.4.2) has become popular, and in its current use, it encompasses a broad range of methods that involve adaptive sampling, rollout, extensions to sequential games, and the use and analysis of various statistical tests. We refer to the papers by Coulom [Cou06], the survey by Browne et al. [BPW12], and the discussion by Fu [Fu17]. The development of statistical tests for adaptive sampling has been influenced by works on multiarmed bandit problems; see the papers by Lai and Robbins [LaR85], Agrawal [Agr95], Burnetas and Katehakis [BuK97], Meuleau and Bourgine [MeB99], Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer [ACF02], Peret and Garcia [PeG04], Kocsis and Szepesvari [KoS06], and the monograph by Munos [Mun14]. The technique for variance reduction in the calculation of Q-factor differences (Section 2.4.2) was given in the author's paper [Ber97].

The MPC approach is popular in a variety of control system design contexts, and particularly in chemical process control and robotics, where meeting explicit control and state constraints is an important practical issue. The connection of MPC with rollout algorithms was made in the author's review paper [Ber05a]. The stability analysis given here is based on the work of Keerthi and Gilbert [KeG88]. For an early survey of the field, which gives many of the early references, see Morari and Lee [MoL99], and for a more recent survey see Mayne [May14]. For related textbooks, see Maciejowski [Mac02], Camacho and Bordons [CaB04], Kouvaritakis and Cannon [KoC15], and Borelli, Bemporad, and Morari [BBM17].

In our account of MPC, we have restricted ourselves to deterministic problems possibly involving tight state constraints as well as control constraints. Problems with stochastic uncertainty and state constraints are more challenging because of the difficulty of guaranteeing that the constraints are satisfied; see the survey by Mayne [May14] for a review of various approaches that have been used in this context. The textbook [Ber17], Section 6.4, describes MPC for problems with set membership uncertainty and state constraints, using target tube/reachability concepts, which originated in the author's PhD thesis and subsequent papers [Ber71], [Ber72a], [BeR71a], [BeR71b], [BeR73]. Target tubes were used subsequently in MPC and other contexts by several authors; see the surveys by Blanchini [Bla99]

and Mayne [May14].

## Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control

by

Dimitri P. Bertsekas

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

## Chapter 3 Parametric Approximation DRAFT

This is Chapter 3 of the draft textbook 'Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control.' The chapter represents 'work in progress,' and it will be periodically updated. It more than likely contains errors (hopefully not serious ones). Furthermore, its references to the literature are incomplete. Your comments and suggestions to the author at dimitrib@mit.edu are welcome. The date of last revision is given below.

The date of last revision is given below. (A 'revision' is any version of the chapter that involves the addition or the deletion of at least one paragraph or mathematically significant equation.)

January 25, 2019

## Parametric Approximation

| Contents       |                                                                                                                           |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|-----|---------------|-----|-----|----|----|----|----|----|-----|----|----|----|-------|
| 3.1.           |                                                                                                                           |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
|                | Approximation Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 2 3.1.1. Linear and Nonlinear Feature-Based Architectures . p. 2 |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
|                | 3.1.2. Training of Linear and Nonlinear Architectures . . p. 9                                                            |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
|                | 3.1.3. Incremental Gradient and Newton Methods . . . . p. 10                                                              |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
| 3.2.           | Networks . . . .                                                                                                          |     | .   | . .           | .   | .   | .  | .  | .  | .  | .  |     | .  | .  |    | p. 23 |
|                | Neural . . 3.2.1. Training of Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . p. 27                                                   |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
|                | 3.2.2. Multilayer and Deep Neural Networks . . . . . . p. 30                                                              |     |     |               |     |     |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |    |    |       |
| 3.3.           | Dynamic Programming                                                                                                       |     |     | Approximation |     |     |    |    |    | .  |    | . . |    |    | .  | p. 34 |
| 3.4. Q-factor  | Sequential Parametric Approximation                                                                                       |     |     |               | . . | .   | .  | .  | .  |    | .  | .   | .  |    | .  | p. 36 |
| 3.5. Notes and | Sources .                                                                                                                 | . . | . . | . .           | .   | . . | .  | .  | .  | .  |    | . . |    | .  |    | p. 39 |

Clearly, for the success of approximation in value space, it is important to select a class of lookahead functions ˜ J k that is suitable for the problem at hand. In the preceding chapter we discussed several methods for choosing ˜ J k based mostly on problem approximation, including rollout. In this chapter we discuss an alternative approach, whereby ˜ J k is chosen to be a member of a parametric class of functions, including neural networks, with the parameters 'optimized' or 'trained' by using some algorithm.

## 3.1 APPROXIMATION ARCHITECTURES

The starting point for the schemes of this chapter is a class of functions ˜ J k ( x k , r k ) that for each k , depend on the current state x k and a vector r k = ( r 1 ,k , . . . , r m,k ) of m 'tunable' scalar parameters, also called weights . By adjusting the weights, one can change the 'shape' of ˜ J k so that it is a reasonably good approximation to the true optimal cost-to-go function J * k . The class of functions ˜ J k ( x k , r k ) is called an approximation architecture , and the process of choosing the parameter vectors r k is commonly called training or tuning the architecture.

The simplest training approach is to do some form of semi-exhaustive or semi-random search in the space of parameter vectors and adopt the parameters that result in best performance of the associated one-step lookahead controller (according to some criterion). More systematic approaches are based on numerical optimization, such as for example a least squares fit that aims to match the cost approximation produced by the architecture to a 'training set,' i.e., a large number of pairs of state and cost values that are obtained through some form of sampling process. Throughout this chapter we will focus on this latter approach.

## 3.1.1 Linear and Nonlinear Feature-Based Architectures

There is a large variety of approximation architectures, based for example on polynomials, wavelets, discretization/interpolation schemes, neural networks, and others. A particularly interesting type of cost approximation involves feature extraction , a process that maps the state x k into some vector φ k ( x k ), called the feature vector associated with x k at time k . The vector φ k ( x k ) consists of scalar components

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

called features . A feature-based cost approximation has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r k is a parameter vector and ˆ J k is some function. Thus, the cost approximation depends on the state x k through its feature vector φ k ( x k ).

Figure 3.1.1 The structure of a linear feature-based architecture. We use a feature extraction mapping to generate an input φ k ( x k ) to a linear mapping defined by a weight vector r k .

<!-- image -->

Note that we are allowing for different features φ k ( x k ) and different parameter vectors r k for each stage k . This is necessary for nonstationary problems (e.g., if the state space changes over time), and also to capture the effect of proximity to the end of the horizon. On the other hand, for stationary problems with a long or infinite horizon, where the state space does not change with k , it is common to use the same features and parameters for all stages. The subsequent discussion can easily be adapted to infinite horizon methods, as we will discuss in Chapter 4.

Features are often handcrafted, based on whatever human intelligence, insight, or experience is available, and are meant to capture the most important characteristics of the current state. There are also systematic ways to construct features, including the use of neural networks, which we will discuss shortly. In this section, we provide a brief and selective discussion of architectures, and we refer to the specialized literature (e.g., Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [BeT96], Bishop [Bis95], Haykin [Hay09], Sutton and Barto [SuB18]), and the author's [Ber12], Section 6.1.1, for more detailed presentations.

One idea behind using features is that the optimal cost-to-go functions J * k may be complicated nonlinear mappings, so it is sensible to try to break their complexity into smaller, less complex pieces. In particular, if the features encode much of the nonlinearity of J * k , we may be able to use a relatively simple architecture ˆ J k to approximate J * k . For example, with a well-chosen feature vector φ k ( x k ), a good approximation to the cost-to-go is often provided by linearly weighting the features, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r /lscript,k and φ /lscript,k ( x k ) are the /lscript th components of r k and φ k ( x k ), respectively, and r ′ k φ k ( x k ) denotes the inner product of r k and φ k ( x k ), viewed as column vectors of /Rfractur m (a prime denoting transposition, so r ′ k is a row vector; see Fig. 3.1.1).

This is called a linear feature-based architecture , and the scalar parameters r /lscript,k are also called weights . Among other advantages, these architectures admit simpler training algorithms that their nonlinear counterparts. Mathematically, the approximating function ˜ J k ( x k , r k ) can be viewed as a

. . . r

Figure 3.1.2 Illustration of a piecewise constant architecture. The state space is partitioned into subsets S 1 , . . . , S m , with each subset S /lscript defining the feature

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with its own weight r /lscript .

member of the subspace spanned by the features φ /lscript,k ( x k ), /lscript = 1 , . . . , m , which for this reason are also referred to basis functions . We provide a few examples, where for simplicity we drop the index k .

## Example 3.1.1 (Piecewise Constant Approximation)

Suppose that the state space is partitioned into subsets S 1 , . . . , S m , so that every state belongs to one and only one subset. Let the /lscript th feature be defined by membership to the set S /lscript , i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the architecture

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r is the vector consists of the m scalar parameters r 1 , . . . , r m . It can be seen that ˜ J ( x, r ) is the piecewise constant function that has value r /lscript for all states within the set S /lscript ; see Fig. 3.1.2.

The piecewise constant approximation is an example of a linear feature-based architecture that involves exclusively local features . These are features that take a nonzero value only for a relatively small subset of states. Thus a change of a single weight causes a change of the value of ˜ J ( x, r ) for relatively few states x . At the opposite end we have linear feature-based architectures that involve global features . These are features that take nonzero values for a large number of states. The following is an example.

## Example 3.1.2 (Polynomial Approximation)

An important case of linear architecture is one that uses polynomial basis functions. Suppose that the state consists of n components x 1 , . . . , x n , each taking values within some range of integers. For example, in a queueing system, x i may represent the number of customers in the i th queue, where i = 1 , . . . , n . Suppose that we want to use an approximating function that is quadratic in the components x i . Then we can define a total of 1 + n + n 2 basis functions that depend on the state x = ( x 1 , . . . , x n ) via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A linear approximation architecture that uses these functions is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the parameter vector r has components r 0 , r i , and r ij , with i = 1 , . . . , n , j = k, . . . , n . Indeed, any kind of approximating function that is polynomial in the components x 1 , . . . , x n can be constructed similarly.

A more general polynomial approximation may be based on some other known features of the state. For example, we may start with a feature vector

φ ( x ) = ( φ 1 ( x ) , . . . , φ m ( x ) ) ′ , and transform it with a quadratic polynomial mapping. In this way we obtain approximating functions of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the parameter r has components r 0 , r i , and r ij , with i, j = 1 , . . . , m . This can also be viewed as a linear architecture that uses the basis functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The preceding example architectures are generic in the sense that they can be applied to many different types of problems. Other architectures rely on problem-specific insight to construct features, which are then combibed into a relatively simple architecture. The following are two examples involving games.

## Example 3.1.3 (Tetris)

Let us revisit the game of tetris, which we discussed in Example 1.3.4. We can model the problem of finding an optimal playing strategy as a finite horizon problem with a very large horizon.

In Example 1.3.4 we viewed as state the pair of the board position x and the shape of the current falling block y . We viewed as control, the horizontal positioning and rotation applied to the falling block. However, the DP algorithm can be executed over the space of x only, since y is an uncontrollable state component. The optimal cost-to-go function is a vector of huge dimension (there are 2 200 board positions in a 'standard' tetris board of width 10 and height 20). However, it has been successfully approximated in practice by low-dimensional linear architectures.

In particular, the following features have been proposed in [BeI96]: the heights of the columns, the height differentials of adjacent columns, the wall height (the maximum column height), the number of holes of the board, and the constant 1 (the unit is often included as a feature in cost approximation architectures, as it allows for a constant shift in the approximating function). These features are readily recognized by tetris players as capturing important aspects of the board position. † There are a total of 22 features for a 'standard' board with 10 columns. Of course the 2 200 × 22 matrix of feature values cannot be stored in a computer, but for any board position, the corresponding row of features can be easily generated, and this is sufficient for implementation of the associated approximate DP algorithms. For recent works involving approximate DP methods and the preceding 22 features, see [Sch13], [GGS13], and [SGG15], which reference several other related papers.

## Example 3.1.4 (Computer Chess)

Computer chess programs that involve feature-based architectures have been available for many years, and are still used widely (they have been upstaged in the mid-2010s by alternative types of chess programs that are based on neural network-based techniques that will be discussed later). These programs are based on approximate DP for minimax problems, ‡ a feature-based parametric architecture, and multistep lookahead. For the most part, however, the computer chess training methodology has been qualitatively different from the parametric approximation methods that we consider in this book.

In particular, with few exceptions, the training of chess architectures has been done with ad hoc hand-tuning techniques (as opposed to some form of optimization). Moreover, the features have traditionally been hand-crafted

† The use of feature-based approximate DP methods for the game of tetris was first suggested in the paper [TsV96], which introduced just two features (in addition to the constant 1): the wall height and the number of holes of the board. Most studies have used the set of features described here, but other sets of features have also been used; see [ThS09] and the discussion in [GGS13].

‡ We have not discussed DP for minimax problems and two-player games, but the ideas of approximation in value space apply to these contexts as well; see [Ber17] for a discussion that is focused on computer chess.

Mobility, Safety, etc Weighting of Features Score Position Evaluator

Material Balance, Mobility, Safety, etc

<!-- image -->

Mobility, Safety, etc Weighting of Features Score Position Evaluator

Figure 3.1.3 A feature-based architecture for computer chess.

based on chess-specific knowledge (as opposed to automatically generated through a neural network or some other method). Indeed, it has been argued that the success of chess programs in outperforming the best humans, can be more properly attributed to the brute-force calculating power of modern computers, which provides long and accurate lookahead, than to the ability of simulation-based algorithmic approaches, which can learn powerful playing strategies that humans have difficulty conceiving or executing. This assessment is changing rapidly following the impressive success of the AlphaZero chess program (Silver et al. [SHS17]). Still, however, computer chess with its use of long lookahead, provides an approximate DP paradigm that may be better suited for some practical contexts where a lot of computational power is available, but innovative and sophisticated algorithms are hard to construct.

The fundamental paper on which all computer chess programs are based was written by one of the most illustrious modern-day applied mathematicians, C. Shannon [Sha50]. Shannon proposed limited lookahead and evaluation of the end positions by means of a 'scoring function' (in our terminology this plays the role of a cost function approximation). This function may involve, for example, the calculation of a numerical value for each of a set of major features of a position that chess players easily recognize (such as material balance, mobility, pawn structure, and other positional factors), together with a method to combine these numerical values into a single score. Shannon then went on to describe various strategies of exhaustive and selective search over a multistep lookahead tree of moves.

We may view the scoring function as a hand-crafted feature-based architecture for evaluating a chess position/state (cf. Fig. 3.1.3). In our earlier notation, it is a function of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which maps a position x into a cost-to-go approximation ˆ J ( φ ( x ) , r ) , a score whose value depends on the feature vector φ ( x ) of the position and a parameter vector r . †

† Because of the nature of the chess game, ˜ J ( x, r ) does not depend critically

In most computer chess programs, the features are weighted linearly, i.e., the architecture ˜ J ( x, r ) that is used for limited lookahead is linear [cf. Eq. (3.1)]. In many cases, the weights are determined manually, by trial and error based on experience. However, in some programs, the weights are determined with supervised learning techniques that use examples of grandmaster play, i.e., by adjustment to bring the play of the program as close as possible to the play of chess grandmasters. This is a technique that applies more broadly in artificial intelligence; see Tesauro [Tes89], [Tes01]. An example is the Deepchess program by David, Netanyahu, and Wolf [DNW16], estimated to perform at a strong grandmaster level, which uses a deep neural network to extract features for use in another approximation architecture.

In a recent computer chess breakthrough, the entire idea of extracting features of a position through human expertise was abandoned in favor of feature discovery through self-play and the use of neural networks. The first program of this type to attain supremacy not only over humans, but also over the best computer programs that use human expertise-based features, was AlphaZero (Silver et al. [SHS17]). This program is based on DP principles of policy iteration, and Monte Carlo tree search. It will be discussed further in Chapter 4.

The next example considers a feature extraction strategy that is particularly relevant to problems of partial state information.

## Example 3.1.5 (Feature Extraction from Sufficient Statistics)

The concept of a sufficient statistic, which originated in inference methodologies, plays an important role in DP. As discussed in Section 1.3, it refers to quantities that summarize all the essential content of the state x k for optimal control selection at time k .

In particular, consider a partial information context where at time k we have accumulated an information record

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which consists of the past controls u 0 , . . . , u k -1 and state-related measurements z 0 , . . . , z k obtained at the times 0 , . . . , k , respectively. The control u k is allowed to depend only on I k , and the optimal policy is a sequence of the form { µ ∗ 0 ( I 0 ) , . . . , µ ∗ N -1 ( I N -1 ) } . We say that a function S k ( I k ) is a sufficient statistic at time k if the control function µ ∗ k depends on I k only through on the time (or move) index. The duration of the game is unknown and so is the horizon of the problem. We are dealing essentially with an infinite horizon minimax problem, whose termination time is finite but unknown, similar to the stochastic shortest path problems to be discussed in Chapter 4. Still, however, chess programs often use features and weights that depend on the phase of the game (opening, middlegame, or endgame). Moreover the programs include specialized knowledge, such as opening and endgame databases. In our discussion we will ignore such possibilities.

S k ( I k ), i.e., for some function ˆ µ k , we have where µ ∗ k is optimal.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There are several examples of sufficient statistics, and they are typically problem-dependent. A trivial possibility is to view I k itself as a sufficient statistic, and a more sophisticated possibility is to view the belief state p k ( I k ) as a sufficient statistic (this is the conditional probability distribution of x k given I k ; a more detailed discussion of these possibilities can be found in [Ber17], Chapter 4).

Since the sufficient statistic contains all the relevant information for control purposes, an idea that suggests itself is to introduce features of the sufficient statistic and to train a corresponding approximation architecture accordingly. As examples of potentially good features, one may consider a partial history (such as the last m measurements and controls in I k ), or some special characteristic of I k (such as whether some alarm-like 'special' event has been observed). In the case where the belief state p k ( I k ) is used as a sufficient statistic, examples of good features may be a point estimate based on p k ( I k ), the variance of this estimate, and other quantities that can be simply extracted from p k ( I k ) [e.g., simplified or certainty equivalent versions of p k ( I k )].

Unfortunately, in many situations an adequate set of features is not known, so it is important to have methods that construct features automatically, to supplement whatever features may already be available. Indeed, there are architectures that do not rely on the knowledge of good features. One of the most popular is neural networks , which we will describe in Section 3.2. Some of these architectures involve training that constructs simultaneously both the feature vectors φ k ( x k ) and the parameter vectors r k that weigh them.

## 3.1.2 Training of Linear and Nonlinear Architectures

The process of choosing the parameter vector r of a parametric architecture ˜ J ( x, r ) is generally referred to as training. The most common type of training is based on a least squares optimization, also known as least squares regression . Here a set of state-cost training pairs ( x s , β s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , called the training set , is collected and r is determined by solving the problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus r is chosen to minimize the error between sample costs β s and the architecture-predicted costs ˜ J ( x s , r ) in a least squares sense. Here typically, there is some 'target' cost function J that we aim to approximate with

˜ J ( · , r ), and the sample cost β s is the value J ( x s ) plus perhaps some error or 'noise.'

The cost function of the training problem (3.2) is generally nonconvex, which may pose challenges, since there may exist multiple local minima. However, for a linear architecture the cost function is convex quadratic, and the training problem admits a closed-form solution. In particular, for the linear architecture the problem becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By setting the gradient of the quadratic objective to 0, we have the linear equation or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus by matrix inversion we obtain the minimizing parameter vector

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Since sometimes the inverse above may not exist, an additional quadratic in r , called a regularization function, is added to the least squares objective to deal with this, and also to help with other issues to be discussed later.)

Thus a linear architecture has the important advantage that the training problem can be solved exactly and conveniently with the formula (3.3) (of course it may be solved by any other algorithm that is suitable for linear least squares problems). By contrast, if we use a nonlinear architecture, such as a neural network, the associated least squares problem is nonquadratic and also nonconvex. Despite this fact, through a combination of sophisticated implementation of special gradient algorithms, called incremental , and powerful computational resources, neural network methods have been successful in practice as we will discuss in Section 3.2.

## 3.1.3 Incremental Gradient and Newton Methods

We will now digress to discuss special methods for solution of the least squares training problem (3.2), assuming a parametric architecture that

is differentiable in the parameter vector. This methodology is properly viewed as a subject in nonlinear programming and iterative algorithms, and as such it can be studied independently of the approximate DP methods of this book. Thus the reader who has already some exposure to the subject may skip to the next section, and return later as needed.

Incremental methods have a rich theory, and our presentation in this section is brief, focusing primarily on implementation and intuition. Some surveys and book references are provided at the end of the chapter, which include a more detailed treatment. In particular, the neuro-dynamic programming book [BeT96] contains convergence analysis for both deterministic and stochastic training problems. Since, we want to cover problems that are more general than the specific least squares training problem (3.2), we will adopt a broader formulation and notation that are standard in nonlinear programming.

## Incremental Gradient Methods

We view the training problem (3.2) as a special case of the minimization of a sum of component functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where each f i is a differentiable scalar function of the n -dimensional vector y (this is the parameter vector). Thus we use the more common symbols y and m in place of r and q , respectively, and we replace the least squares terms ˜ J ( x s , r ) in the training problem (3.2) with the generic terms f i ( y ).

The (ordinary) gradient method for problem (3.4) has the form †

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ k is a positive stepsize parameter. Incremental gradient methods have the general form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i k is some index from the set { 1 , . . . , m } , chosen by some deterministic or randomized rule. Thus a single component function f i k is used at

† We use standard calculus notation for gradients; see, e.g., [Ber16], Appendix A. In particular, ∇ f ( y ) denotes the n dimensional vector whose components are the first partial derivatives ∂f ( y ) /∂y i of f with respect to the components y 1 , . . . , y n of the vector y .

each iteration of the incremental method (3.6), with great economies in gradient calculation cost over the ordinary gradient method (3.5), particularly when m is large.

The method for selecting the index i k of the component to be iterated on at iteration k is important for the performance of the method. Three common rules are:

- (1) A cyclic order , the simplest rule, whereby the indexes are taken up in the fixed deterministic order 1 , . . . , m , so that i k is equal to ( k modulo m ) plus 1. A contiguous block of iterations involving the components

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in this order and exactly once is called a cycle .

- (2) A uniform random order , whereby the index i k chosen randomly by sampling over all indexes with a uniform distribution, independently of the past history of the algorithm. This rule may perform better that the cyclic rule in some circumstances.
- (3) A cyclic order with random reshuffling , whereby the indexes are taken up one by one within each cycle, but their order after each cycle is reshuffled randomly (and independently of the past). This rule is used widely in practice, particularly when the number of components m is modest, for reasons to be discussed later.

Note that in the cyclic case, it is essential to include all components in a cycle, for otherwise some components will be sampled more often than others, leading to a bias in the convergence process. Simlarly, it is necessary to sample according to the uniform distribution in the random order case.

Focusing for the moment on the cyclic rule, we note that the motivation for the incremental gradient method is faster convergence: we hope that far from the solution, a single cycle of the method will be as effective as several (as many as m ) iterations of the ordinary gradient method (think of the case where the components f i are similar in structure). Near a solution, however, the incremental method may not be as effective.

To be more specific, we note that there are two complementary performance issues to consider in comparing incremental and nonincremental methods:

- (a) Progress when far from convergence . Here the incremental method can be much faster. For an extreme case take m large and all components f i identical to each other. Then an incremental iteration requires m times less computation than a classical gradient iteration, but gives exactly the same result, when the stepsize is scaled to be m times larger. While this is an extreme example, it reflects the essential mechanism by which incremental methods can be much superior: far from the minimum a single component gradient will point to 'more

or less' the right direction, at least most of the time; see the following example.

- (b) Progress when close to convergence . Here the incremental method can be inferior. In particular, the ordinary gradient method (3.5) can be shown to converge with a constant stepsize under reasonable assumptions, see e.g., [Ber16], Chapter 1. However, the incremental method requires a diminishing stepsize, and its ultimate rate of convergence can be much slower.

This type of behavior is illustrated in the following example.

## Example 3.1.6

Assume that y is a scalar, and that the problem is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash where c i and b i are given scalars with c i = 0 for all i . The minimum of each of the components f i ( y ) = 1 2 ( c i y -b i ) 2 is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while the minimum of the least squares cost function f is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be seen that y ∗ lies within the range of the component minima

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and that for all y outside the range R , the gradient

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has the same sign as ∇ f ( y ) (see Fig. 3.1.4). As a result, when outside the region R , the incremental gradient method

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

approaches y ∗ at each step, provided the stepsize γ k is small enough. In fact it can be verified that it is sufficient that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 3.1.4. Illustrating the advantage of incrementalism when far from the optimal solution. The region of component minima

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is labeled as the 'region of confusion.' It is the region where the method does not have a clear direction towards the optimum. The i th step in an incremental gradient cycle is a gradient step for minimizing ( c i y -b i ) 2 , so if y lies outside the region of component minima R = [ min i y ∗ i , max i y ∗ i ] , (labeled as the 'farout region') and the stepsize is small enough, progress towards the solution y ∗ is made.

However, for y inside the region R , the i th step of a cycle of the incremental gradient method need not make progress. It will approach y ∗ (for small enough stepsize γ k ) only if the current point y k does not lie in the interval connecting y ∗ i and y ∗ . This induces an oscillatory behavior within the region R , and as a result, the incremental gradient method will typically not converge to y ∗ unless γ k → 0. By contrast, the ordinary gradient method, which takes the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be verified to converge to y ∗ for any constant stepsize γ with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

However, for y outside the region R , a full iteration of the ordinary gradient method need not make more progress towards the solution than a single step of the incremental gradient method. In other words, with comparably intelligent

stepsize choices, far from the solution (outside R ), a single pass through the entire set of cost components by incremental gradient is roughly as effective as m passes by ordinary gradient .

The discussion of the preceding example relies on y being one-dimensional, but in many multidimensional problems the same qualitative behavior can be observed. In particular, a pass through the i th component f i by the incremental gradient method can make progress towards the solution in the region where the component gradient ∇ f i k ( y k ) makes an angle less than 90 degrees with the cost function gradient ∇ f ( y k ). If the components f i are not 'too dissimilar', this is likely to happen in a region of points that are not too close to the optimal solution set. This behavior has been verified in many practical contexts, including the training of neural networks (cf. the next section), where incremental gradient methods have been used extensively, frequently under the name backpropagation methods .

## Stepsize Choice and Diagonal Scaling

The choice of the stepsize γ k plays an important role in the performance of incremental gradient methods. On close examination, it turns out that the direction used by the method differs from the gradient direction by an error that is proportional to the stepsize, and for this reason a diminishing stepsize is essential for convergence to a local minimum of f (convergence to a local minimum is the best we hope for since the cost function may not be convex).

/negationslash

However, it turns out that a peculiar form of convergence also typically occurs for a constant but sufficiently small stepsize. In this case, the iterates converge to a 'limit cycle', whereby the i th iterates ψ i within the cycles converge to a different limit than the j th iterates ψ j for i = j . The sequence { y k } of the iterates obtained at the end of cycles converges, except that the limit obtained need not be a minimum of f , even when f is convex. The limit tends to be close to the minimum point when the constant stepsize is small (see Section 2.4 of [Ber16] for analysis and examples). In practice, it is common to use a constant stepsize for a (possibly prespecified) number of iterations, then decrease the stepsize by a certain factor, and repeat, up to the point where the stepsize reaches a prespecified floor value.

An alternative possibility is to use a diminishing stepsize rule of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ , β 1 , and β 2 are some positive scalars. There are also variants of the incremental gradient method that use a constant stepsize throughout, and generically converge to a stationary point of f at a linear rate. In one type of such method the degree of incrementalism gradually diminishes as

the method progresses (see [Ber97a]). Another incremental approach with similar aims, is the aggregated incremental gradient method, which will be discussed later in this section.

Regardless of whether a constant or a diminishing stepsize is ultimately used, to maintain the advantage of faster convergence when far from the solution, the incremental method must use a much larger stepsize than the corresponding nonincremental gradient method (as much as m times larger so that the size of the incremental gradient step is comparable to the size of the nonincremental gradient step).

One possibility is to use an adaptive stepsize rule, whereby the stepsize is reduced (or increased) when the progress of the method indicates that the algorithm is oscillating because it operates within (or outside, respectively) the region of confusion. There are formal ways to implement such stepsize rules with sound convergence properties (see [Tse98], [MYF03], [GOP15a]).

The difficulty with stepsize selection may also be addressed with diagonal scaling , i.e., using a stepsize γ k j that is different for each of the components y j of y . Second derivatives can be very effective for this purpose. In generic nonlinear programming problems of unconstrained minimization of a function f , it is common to use diagonal scaling with stepsizes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ is a constant that is nearly equal 1 (the second derivatives may also be approximated by gradient difference approximations). However, in least squares training problems, this type of scaling is inconvenient because of the additive form of f as a sum of a large number of component functions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

cf. Eq. (3.4). Later in this section, when we discuss incremental Newton methods, we will provide a type of diagonal scaling that uses second derivatives and is well suited to the additive character of f .

## Stochastic Gradient Descent

Incremental gradient methods are related to methods that aim to minimize an expected value f ( y ) = E { F ( y, w ) } , where w is a random variable, and F ( · , w ) : /Rfractur n ↦→ /Rfractur is a differentiable function for each possible value of w . The stochastic gradient method for minimizing f is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w k is a sample of w and ∇ y F denotes gradient of F with respect to y . This method has a rich theory and a long history, and it is strongly related to the classical algorithmic field of stochastic approximation ; see the books [BeT96], [KuY03], [Spa03], [Mey07], [Bor08], [BPP13]. The method is also often referred to as stochastic gradient descent , particularly in the context of machine learning applications.

If we view the expected value cost E { F ( y, w ) } as a weighted sum of cost function components, we see that the stochastic gradient method (3.7) is related to the incremental gradient method

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for minimizing a finite sum ∑ m i =1 f i , when randomization is used for component selection. An important difference is that the former method involves stochastic sampling of cost components F ( y, w ) from a possibly infinite population, under some probabilistic assumptions, while in the latter the set of cost components f i is predetermined and finite. However, it is possible to view the incremental gradient method (3.8), with uniform randomized selection of the component function f i (i.e., with i k chosen to be any one of the indexes 1 , . . . , m , with equal probability 1 /m , and independently of preceding choices), as a stochastic gradient method.

Despite the apparent similarity of the incremental and the stochastic gradient methods, the view that the problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can simply be treated as a special case of the problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is questionable.

One reason is that once we convert the finite sum problem to a stochastic problem, we preclude the use of methods that exploit the finite sum structure, such as the incremental aggregated gradient methods to be discussed in the next subsection. Another reason is that the finitecomponent problem (3.9) is often genuinely deterministic, and to view it as a stochastic problem at the outset may mask some of its important characteristics, such as the number m of cost components, or the sequence in which the components are ordered and processed. These characteristics may potentially be algorithmically exploited. For example, with insight into the problem's structure, one may be able to discover a special deterministic or partially randomized order of processing the component functions that is superior to a uniform randomized order. On the other hand

analysis indicates that in the absence of problem-specific knowledge that can be exploited to select a favorable deterministic order, a uniform randomized order (each component f i chosen with equal probability 1 /m at each iteration, independently of preceding choices) sometimes has superior worst-case complexity; see [NeB00], [NeB01], [BNO03], [Ber15a], [WaB16].

Finally, let us note the popular hybrid technique, which reshuffles randomly the order of the cost components after each cycle. Practical experience and recent analysis [GOP15c] indicates that it has somewhat better performance to the uniform randomized order when m is large. One possible reason is that random reshuffling allocates exactly one computation slot to each component in an m -slot cycle, while uniform sampling allocates one computation slot to each component on the average . A nonzero variance in the number of slots that any fixed component gets within a cycle, may be detrimental to performance. While it seems difficult to establish this fact analytically, a justification is suggested by the view of the incremental gradient method as a gradient method with error in the computation of the gradient. The error has apparently greater variance in the uniform sampling method than in the random reshuffling method, and heuristically, if the variance of the error is larger, the direction of descent deteriorates, suggesting slower convergence.

## Incremental Aggregated Gradient Methods

Another algorithm that is well suited for least squares training problems is the incremental aggregated gradient method , which has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f i k is the new component function selected for iteration k . † In the most common version of the method the component indexes i k are selected in a cyclic order [ i k = ( k modulo m ) + 1]. Random selection of the index i k has also been suggested.

From Eq. (3.10) it can be seen that the method computes the gradient incrementally, one component per iteration. However, in place of the single component gradient ∇ f i k ( y k ) , used in the incremental gradient method (3.6), it uses the sum of the component gradients computed in the past m iterations, which is an approximation to the total cost gradient ∇ f ( y k ).

The idea of the method is that by aggregating the component gradients one may be able to reduce the error between the true gradient ∇ f ( y k ) and the incrementally computed approximation used in Eq. (3.10), and thus attain a faster asymptotic convergence rate. Indeed, it turns out that

† In the case where k &lt; m , the summation in Eq. (3.10) should go up to /lscript = k , and the stepsize should be replaced by a corresponding larger value.

under certain conditions the method exhibits a linear convergence rate, just like in the nonincremental gradient method, without incurring the cost of a full gradient evaluation at each iteration (a strongly convex cost function and with a sufficiently small constant stepsize are required for this; see [Ber16], Section 2.4.2, and the references quoted there). This is in contrast with the incremental gradient method (3.6), for which a linear convergence rate can be achieved only at the expense of asymptotic error, as discussed earlier.

A disadvantage of the aggregated gradient method (3.10) is that it requires that the most recent component gradients be kept in memory, so that when a component gradient is reevaluated at a new point, the preceding gradient of the same component is discarded from the sum of gradients of Eq. (3.10). There have been alternative implementations that ameliorate this memory issue, by recalculating the full gradient periodically and replacing an old component gradient by a new one. More specifically, instead of the gradient sum

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in Eq. (3.10), these methods use

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ y k is the most recent point where the full gradient has been calculated. To calculate ˜ s k one only needs to compute the difference of the two gradients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and add it to the full gradient ∑ m -1 /lscript =0 ∇ f i k -/lscript (˜ y k ). This bypasses the need for extensive memory storage, and with proper implementation, typically leads to small degradation in performance. However, periodically calculating the full gradient when m is very large can be a drawback. Another potential drawback of the aggregated gradient method is that for a large number of terms m , one hopes to converge within the first cycle through the components f i , thereby reducing the effect of aggregating the gradients of the components.

## Incremental Newton Methods

We will now consider an incremental version of Newton's method for unconstrained minimization of an additive cost function of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the functions f i are convex and twice continuously differentiable. †

The ordinary Newton's method, at the current iterate y k , obtains the next iterate y k +1 by minimizing over y the quadratic approximation/second order expansion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of f at y k . Similarly, the incremental form of Newton's method minimizes a sum of quadratic approximations of components of the general form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as we will now explain.

As in the case of the incremental gradient method, we view an iteration as a cycle of m subiterations, each involving a single additional component f i , and its gradient and Hessian at the current point within the cycle. In particular, if y k is the vector obtained after k cycles, the vector y k +1 obtained after one more cycle is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where starting with ψ 0 ,k = y k , we obtain ψ m,k after the m steps

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ f /lscript is defined as the quadratic approximation (3.11). If all the functions f i are quadratic, it can be seen that the method finds the solution in a single cycle. ‡ The reason is that when f i is quadratic, each f i ( y ) differs from ˜ f i ( y ; ψ ) by a constant, which does not depend on y . Thus the difference

† We will denote by ∇ 2 f ( y ) the n × n Hessian matrix of f at y , i.e., the matrix whose ( i, j )th component is the second partial derivative ∂ 2 f ( y ) /∂y i ∂y j . A beneficial consequence of assuming convexity of f i is that the Hessian matrices ∇ 2 f i ( y ) are positive semidefinite, which facilitates the implementation of the algorithms to be described. On the other hand, the algorithmic ideas of this section may also be adapted for the case where f i are nonconvex.

‡ Here we assume that the m quadratic minimizations (3.12) to generate ψ m,k have a solution. For this it is sufficient that the first Hessian matrix ∇ 2 f 1 ( y 0 ) be positive definite, in which case there is a unique solution at every iteration. A simple possibility to deal with this requirement is to add to f 1 a small positive regularization term, such as /epsilon1 2 ‖ y -y 0 ‖ 2 . A more sound possibility is to lump together several of the component functions (enough to ensure that the sum of their quadratic approximations at y 0 is positive definite), and to use them in place of f 1 . This is generally a good idea and leads to smoother initialization, as it ensures a relatively stable behavior of the algorithm for the initial iterations.

is a constant that is independent of y , and minimization of either sum in the above expression gives the same result.

It is important to note that the computations of Eq. (3.12) can be carried out efficiently. For simplicity, let as assume that ˜ f 1 ( y ; ψ ) is a positive definite quadratic, so that for all i , ψ i,k is well defined as the unique solution of the minimization problem in Eq. (3.12). We will show that the incremental Newton method (3.12) can be implemented in terms of the incremental update formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where D i,k is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and is generated iteratively as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Indeed, from the definition of the method (3.12), the quadratic function ∑ i -1 /lscript =1 ˜ f /lscript ( y ; ψ /lscript -1 ,k ) is minimized by ψ i -1 ,k and its Hessian matrix is D -1 i -1 ,k , so we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, by adding ˜ f i ( y ; ψ i -1 ,k ) to both sides of this expression, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since by definition ψ i,k minimizes this function, we obtain Eqs. (3.13)(3.15).

The recursion (3.15) for the matrix D i,k can often be efficiently implemented by using convenient formulas for the inverse of the sum of two matrices. In particular, if f i is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some twice differentiable convex function h i : /Rfractur ↦→ /Rfractur , vector a i , and scalar b i , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the recursion (3.15) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

this is the well-known Sherman-Morrison formula for the inverse of the sum of an invertible matrix and a rank-one matrix.

We have considered so far a single cycle of the incremental Newton method. Similar to the case of the incremental gradient method, we may cycle through the component functions multiple times. In particular, we may apply the incremental Newton method to the extended set of components

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The resulting method asymptotically resembles an incremental gradient method with diminishing stepsize of the type described earlier. Indeed, from Eq. (3.14)], the matrix D i,k diminishes roughly in proportion to 1 /k . From this it follows that the asymptotic convergence properties of the incremental Newton method are similar to those of an incremental gradient method with diminishing stepsize of order O (1 /k ). Thus its convergence rate is slower than linear.

To accelerate the convergence of the method one may employ a form of restart, so that D i,k does not converge to 0. For example D i,k may be reinitialized and increased in size at the beginning of each cycle. For problems where f has a unique nonsingular minimum y ∗ [one for which ∇ 2 f ( y ∗ ) is nonsingular], one may design incremental Newton schemes with restart that converge linearly to within a neighborhood of y ∗ (and even superlinearly if y ∗ is also a minimum of all the functions f i , so there is no region of confusion). Alternatively, the update formula (3.15) may be modified to by introducing a parameter β k ∈ (0 , 1), which can be used to accelerate the practical convergence rate of the method; cf. the discussion of the incremental Gauss-Newton methods.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Incremental Newton Method with Diagonal Approximation

Generally, with proper implementation, the incremental Newton method is often substantially faster than the incremental gradient method, in terms of numbers of iterations (there are theoretical results suggesting this property for stochastic versions of the two methods; see the end-of-chapter references). However, in addition to computation of second derivatives, the incremental Newton method involves greater overhead per iteration due to the matrix-vector calculations in Eqs. (3.13), (3.15), and (3.16), so it is suitable only for problems where n , the dimension of y , is relatively small.