equations with Galerkin methods was first discussed by Yu and Bertsekas [YuB10], and Bertsekas [Ber11c], and is potentially important as it may lead to cross-fertilization of ideas. However, the Monte Carlo simulation ideas that are central in approximate DP differentiate the projected equation methods of the present chapter from the Galerkin methodology. On the other hand, Galerkin methods apply to a wide range of problems, far beyond DP, and the simulation-based ideas of approximate DP can consequently be extended to apply more broadly (see [Ber12], Section 7.3).

Temporal difference methods originated in RL, where they are viewed as a means to encode the error in predicting future costs of a given policy, which is associated and an approximation architecture. They were introduced in the works of Samuel [Sam59], [Sam67] on a checkers-playing program. The work by Sutton [Sut88], following earlier work by Barto, Sutton, and Anderson [BSA83], formalized temporal differences and proposed the TD( λ ) method. This was a major development and motivated a lot of research in simulation-based DP, particularly following an impressive early success with the backgammon playing program of Tesauro [Tes92], [Tes94].

The three methods TD( λ ), LSTD( λ ), and LSPE( λ ) are discussed in detail in the journal and textbook RL literature. For a discussion that extends our presentation of Section 4.9, see Chapters 6 and 7 of the book [Ber12].

The convergence of TD( λ ) was proved by Tsitsiklis and Van Roy [TsV97], with extensions in [TsV99a] and [TsV99b]. The author's papers [Ber16b], [Ber18d] describe the connection of TD and proximal methods, a central methodology in convex optimization. In particular, TD( λ ) is shown to be a stochastic version of the proximal algorithm for solving linear systems of equations, and extensions of TD( λ ) for solving nonlinear systems of equations are described.

The LSTD( λ ) algorithm was first proposed by Bradtke and Barto [BrB96] for λ = 0, and was extended for λ &gt; 0 later by Boyan [Boy02]. Convergence analyses of LSTD( λ ) under assumptions of increasing generality were given by Nedi´ c and Bertsekas [NeB03], Bertsekas and Yu [BeY09], and Yu [Yu12].

The LSPE( λ ) algorithm was first proposed by Bertsekas and Ioffe [BeI96] under the name λ -policy iteration , and it was used to train a tetris playing program using the feature-based linear architecture described in Example 3.1.3. The motivation for λ -policy iteration was to provide a better alternative to TD( λ )-based policy iteration, which failed within the tetris context. LSPE( λ ) was also given in the book [BeT96], Section 2.3.1, with subsequent contributions by Nedic, Borkar, Yu, Scherrer, and the author [NeB03], [BBN04], [YuB07], [BeY09], [YuB09], [Ber11b], [Yu12], [Sch13], [Ber18a].

In our discussion here, we did not go much into the implementation details of TD( λ ), LSTD( λ ), and LSPE( λ ); see the approximate DP/RL

textbooks cited earlier, and the paper by Bertsekas and Yu [BeY09], which adapts the TD methodology to the solution of large systems of linear equations.

Policy gradient methods have a long history. For a detailed discussion and references we refer to the book by Sutton and Barto [SuB18], the monograph by Deisenroth, Neumann, and Peters [DNP11], and the survey by Grondman et. al. [GBL12]. The use of the log-likelihood trick in the context of simulation-based DP is generally attributed to Williams [Wil92]. Early works on simulation-based policy gradient schemes for various DP problems have been given by Glynn [Gly87], L'Ecuyer [L'Ec91], Fu and Hu [FuH94], Jaakkola, Singh, and Jordan [JSJ95], Cao and Chen [CaC97], Cao and Wan [CaW98]. The more recent works of Marbach and Tsitsiklis [MaT01], [MaT03], Konda and Tsitsiklis [KoT99], [KoT03], and Sutton et. al. [SMS99] have been influential. For textbook discussions of the cross-entropy method, see Rubinstein and Kroese [RuK04], [RuK17], and Busoniu et. al. [BBD10], and for surveys see de Boer et. al. [BKM05], and Kroese et. al. [KRC13].

## 4.13 APPENDIX: MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS

In this appendix we provide proofs of the mathematical results stated in this chapter. We also prove some supplementary results that are described in the chapter without formal statement.

We will make heavy use of the DP operators T and T µ , particularly for the discounted problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A key property is the monotonicity of these operators, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also for the discounted problem, we have the 'constant shift' property, which states that if the functions J is increased uniformly by a constant c , then the functions TJ and T µ J are also increased uniformly by the constant αc .

## 4.13.1 Proofs for Stochastic Shortest Path Problems

We provide the proofs of Props. 4.2.1-4.2.5 from Section 4.2. A key insight for the analysis is that the expected cost incurred within an m -stage block vanishes exponentially as the start of the block moves forward (here m is the integer specified by Assumption 4.2.1, i.e., the termination state can be reached within m steps with positive probability from every starting state). In particular, the cost in the m stages between km and ( k +1) m -1 is bounded in absolute value by ρ k C , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we have

This shows that the 'tail' of the cost series,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

vanishes as K increases to ∞ , since the probability that x mK = t decreases like ρ K [cf. Eq. (4.6)]. Intuitively, since the 'tail' of the cost series can be neglected as K → ∞ , it is valid to take the limit in the finite horizon DP algorithm, and obtain the infinite horizon Bellman equation and VI convergence. Mathematically, this is the essence of the following proofs.

/negationslash

Proposition 4.2.1: (Convergence of VI) Given any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the sequence { J k ( i ) } generated by the VI algorithm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to the optimal cost J * ( i ) for each i = 1 , . . . , n .

Proof: For every positive integer K , initial state x 0 , and policy π = { µ 0 , µ 1 , . . . } , we break down the cost J π ( x 0 ) into the portions incurred

over the first mK stages and over the remaining stages:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The expected cost during the K th m -stage cycle [stages Km to ( K +1) m -1] is upper bounded by Cρ K [cf. Eqs. (4.6) and (4.94)], so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ Also, denoting J 0 ( t ) = 0, let us view J 0 as a terminal cost function and bound its expected value under π after mK stages. We have

/negationslash

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since the probability that x mK = t is less or equal to ρ K for any policy. Combining the preceding relations, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the expected value in the middle term of the above inequalities is the mK -stage cost of policy π starting from state x 0 , with a terminal cost J 0 ( x mK ); the minimum of this cost over all π is equal to the value J mK ( x 0 ), which is generated by the DP recursion (4.95) after mK iterations. Thus, by taking the minimum over π in Eq. (4.96), we obtain for all x 0 and K ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by taking the limit as K →∞ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all x 0 . Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ we see that lim K →∞ J mK + /lscript ( x 0 ) is the same for all /lscript = 1 , . . . , m, so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Q.E.D.

Proposition 4.2.2: (Bellman's Equation) The optimal cost function J * = ( J * (1) , . . . , J * ( n ) ) satisfies for all i = 1 , . . . , n , the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and in fact it is the unique solution of this equation.

Proof: By taking the limit as k → ∞ in the DP iteration (4.95) and using the result of Prop. 4.2.1, we see that J * (1) , . . . , J * ( n ) satisfy Bellman's equation (we are using here the fact that the limit and minimization operations commute when the minimization is over a finite number of alternatives). To show uniqueness, observe that if J (1) , . . . , J ( n ) satisfy Bellman's equation, then the DP iteration (4.95) starting from J (1) , . . . , J ( n ) just replicates J (1) , . . . , J ( n ). It follows from the convergence result of Prop. 4.2.1 that J ( i ) = J * ( i ) for all i . Q.E.D.

Proposition 4.2.3: (VI and Bellman's Equation for Policies) For any stationary policy µ , the corresponding cost function J µ = J µ (1) , . . . , J µ ( n ) satisfies for all i = 1 , . . . , n the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( )

and is in fact the unique solution of this equation. Furthermore, given any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the sequence { J k ( i ) } generated by the VI algorithm that is specific to µ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to the cost J µ ( i ) for each i .

Proof: Given µ , consider a modified stochastic shortest path problem, which is the same as the original except that the control constraint set contains only one element for each state i , the control µ ( i ); i.e., the control constraint set is ˜ U ( i ) = { µ ( i ) } instead of U ( i ). From Prop. 4.2.2, J µ solves uniquely Bellman's equation for this modified problem, i.e., for all i ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Prop. 4.2.1, the VI algorithm converges to J µ ( i ). Q.E.D.

Proposition 4.2.4: (Optimality Condition) A stationary policy µ is optimal if and only if for every state i , µ ( i ) attains the minimum in Bellman's equation (4.7).

Proof: We have that µ ( i ) attains the minimum in Eq. (4.7) if and only if for all i = 1 , . . . , n , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 4.2.3 and this equation imply that J µ ( i ) = J * ( i ) for all i . Conversely, if J µ ( i ) = J * ( i ) for all i , Props. 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 imply this equation. Q.E.D.

Proposition 4.2.5: (Contraction Property of the DP Operator) The DP operators T and T µ of Eqs. (4.8) and (4.9) are contraction mappings with respect to some weighted norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

defined by some vector v = ( v (1) , . . . , v ( n ) ) with positive components. In other words, there exist positive scalar ρ &lt; 1 and ρ µ &lt; 1 such that for any two n -dimensional vectors J and J ′ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: We first define the vector v using the problem of Example 4.2.1. In particular, we let v ( i ) be the maximal expected number of steps to termination starting from state i . From Bellman's equation in Example 4.2.1, we have for all i = 1 , . . . , n , and stationary policies µ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus we obtain for all µ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since v ( i ) ≥ 1 for all i , we have ρ &lt; 1.

We will now show that Eq. (4.97) implies the desired contraction property. Indeed, consider the operator T µ , which when applied to a vector J = ( J (1) , . . . , J ( n ) ) produces the vector T µ J = ( ( T µ J )(1) , . . . , ( T µ J )( n ) ) defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , n . We have for all J , J ′ , and i

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last inequality follows from Eq. (4.97). By minimizing both sides over all µ ( i ) ∈ U ( i ), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, by reversing the roles of J and J ′ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By combining the preceding two inequalities, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by maximizing the left-hand side over i , the contraction property ‖ TJ -TJ ′ ‖ ≤ ρ ‖ J -J ′ ‖ follows. Q.E.D.

## 4.13.2 Proofs for Discounted Problems

/negationslash

Since we have shown that the discounted problem can be converted to the equivalent SSP problem of Fig. 4.3.1, we can apply Props. 4.2.1-4.2.4. Then Props. 4.3.1-4.3.4 are obtained from the construction of Fig. 4.3.1. The contraction property of Prop. 4.3.5 can also be proved in the same way, since in the SSP problem of Fig. 4.3.1, the expected number of steps to terminate starting from a state i = t can be obtained as the mean of a geometrically distributed random variable with parameter 1 -α :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that the modulus of contraction is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus by applying Prop. 4.2.5, we obtain Prop. 4.3.5. Note that there is similar contraction property for T µ .

## 4.13.3 Convergence of Exact and Optimistic Policy Iteration

We provide a proof of the convergence of exact PI for the case of a discounted problem. The proof for the SSP problem is similar.

Proposition 4.5.1: (Convergence of Exact PI) For both the SSP and the discounted problems, the exact PI algorithm generates an improving sequence of policies [i.e., J µ k +1 ( i ) ≤ J µ k ( i ) for all i and k ] and terminates with an optimal policy.

Proof: For any k , consider the sequence generated by the VI algorithm for policy µ k +1 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N = 0 , 1 , . . . , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Eqs. (4.34) and (4.33), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i . By using the above inequality we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i , and by continuing similarly we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since by Prop. 4.3.3, J N ( i ) → J µ k +1 ( i ), we obtain J 0 ( i ) ≥ J µ k +1 ( i ) or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the sequence of generated policies is improving, and since the number of stationary policies is finite, we must after a finite number of iterations, say k + 1, obtain J µ k ( i ) = J µ k +1 ( i ) for all i . Then we will have equality throughout in Eq. (4.98), which means that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the costs J µ k (1) , . . . , J µ k ( n ) solve Bellman's equation, and by Prop. 4.3.2, it follows that J µ k ( i ) = J * ( i ) and that µ k is optimal. Q.E.D.

We provide a proof of convergence of optimistic PI for discounted problems.

Proposition 4.5.2: (Convergence of Optimistic PI) For the discounted problem, the sequences { J k } and { µ k } generated by the optimistic PI algorithm satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: First we choose a scalar r such that the vector ¯ J 0 defined by ¯ J 0 = J 0 + r e , satisfies T ¯ J 0 ≤ ¯ J 0 [here and later, e is the unit vector, i.e., e ( i ) = 1 for all i ]. This can be done since if r is such that TJ 0 -J 0 ≤ (1 -α ) r e, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where e = (1 , 1 , . . . , 1) ′ is the unit vector.

With ¯ J 0 so chosen, define for all k , ¯ J k +1 = T m k µ k ¯ J k . Then since we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any J and µ , it can be seen by induction that for all k and m = 0 , 1 , . . . , m k , the vectors J k +1 = T m µ k J k and ¯ J k +1 = T m µ k ¯ J k differ by a multiple of the unit vector, namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that if J 0 is replaced by ¯ J 0 as the starting vector in the algorithm, the same sequence of policies { µ k } will be obtained; i.e., for all k , we have T µ k ¯ J k = T ¯ J k . Moreover, we have lim k →∞ ( ¯ J k -J k ) = 0.

Next we will show that J * ≤ ¯ J k ≤ T k ¯ J 0 for all k , from which convergence will follow. Indeed, we have T µ 0 ¯ J 0 = T ¯ J 0 ≤ ¯ J 0 , from which we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This argument can be continued to show that for all k , we have ¯ J k ≤ T ¯ J k -1 , so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, since T ¯ J 0 ≤ ¯ J 0 , we have J * ≤ ¯ J 0 , and it follows that successive application of any number of operators of the form T µ to ¯ J 0 produces functions that are bounded from below by J * . Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By taking the limit as k → ∞ , we obtain lim k →∞ ¯ J k ( i ) = J * ( i ) for all i , and since lim k →∞ ( ¯ J k -J k ) = 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, from the finiteness of the state and control spaces, it follows that there exists /epsilon1 &gt; 0 such that if max i ∣ ∣ J ( i ) -J * ( i ) ∣ ∣ ≤ /epsilon1 and T µ J = TJ , so that µ is optimal. Since J k → J * , this shows that µ k is optimal for all sufficiently large k . Q.E.D.

## 4.13.4 Performance Bounds for One-Step Lookahead, Rollout, and Approximate Policy Iteration

We first prove the basic performance bounds for /lscript -step lookahead schemes and discounted problems.

## Proposition 4.6.1: (Limited Lookahead Performance Bounds)

- (a) Let ˜ µ be the /lscript -step lookahead policy corresponding to ˜ J . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ‖ · ‖ denotes the maximum norm (4.15).

- (b) Let ˜ µ be the one-step lookahead policy obtained by minimization in the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where U ( i ) ⊂ U ( i ) for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Assume that for some constant c , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: (a) In the course of the proof, we will use the contraction property of T and T µ (cf. Prop. 4.3.5). Using the triangle inequality, we write for every k ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By taking the limit as k →∞ and using the fact T k ˜ µ J * → J ˜ µ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denote ˆ J = T /lscript -1 ˜ J . The rightmost expression of Eq. (4.103) is estimated by using the triangle inequality and the fact T ˜ µ ˆ J = T ˆ J as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By combining the preceding two relations, we obtain Eq. (4.99).

(b) Let us denote by e the unit vector whose components are all equal to 1. Then by assumption, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying T ˜ µ to both sides of this relation, and using the monotonicity and constant shift property of T ˜ µ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Continuing similarly, we have,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Adding these relations, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the limit as k →∞ , and using the fact T k +1 ˜ µ ˜ J → J ˜ µ , we obtain the desired inequality (4.102). Q.E.D.

We next show the basic cost improvement property of rollout.

Proposition 4.6.2: (Cost Improvement by Rollout) Let ˜ µ be the rollout policy obtained by the one-step lookahead minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ is a base policy [cf. Eq. (4.100) with ˜ J = J µ ] and we assume that µ ( i ) ∈ U ( i ) ⊂ U ( i ) for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Then J ˜ µ ≤ J µ .

Proof: Let us denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have for all i = 1 , . . . , n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the equality on the right holds by Bellman's equation. Hence the hypothesis of Prop. 4.6.1(b) holds, and the result follows. Q.E.D.

We finally show the following performance bound for the rollout algorithm with cost function approximation.

Proposition 4.6.3: (Performance Bound of Rollout with Terminal Cost Function Approximation) Let /lscript and m be positive integers, let µ be a policy, and let ˜ J be a function of the state. Consider a truncated rollout scheme consisting of /lscript -step lookahead, followed by rollout with a policy µ for m steps, and a terminal cost function approximation ˜ J at the end of the m steps. Let ˜ µ be the policy generated by this scheme.

- (a) We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T µ is the DP operator of Eq. (4.14), and ‖ · ‖ denotes the maximum norm (4.15).

- (b) Assume that for some constant c , ˜ J and µ satisfy the condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Part (a) is simply Prop. 4.6.1(a) adapted to the truncated rollout scheme, so we focus on the proof of part (b). We first prove the result for the case where c = 0. Then the condition (4.104) can be written as ˜ J ≥ T µ ˜ J , from which by using the monotonicity of T and T µ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This relation and the monotonicity of T µ , imply that { T k ˜ µ T /lscript -1 T µ m ˜ J } is monotonically nonincreasing as k increases, and is bounded above by ˜ J . Since by Prop. 4.3.3 (VI convergence), the sequence converges to J ˜ µ as k →∞ , the result follows.

To prove the result for general c , we introduce the function J ′ given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the condition (4.104) can be written in terms of J ′ as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or equivalently as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since adding a constant to the components of ˜ J does not change ˜ µ , we can replace ˜ J with J ′ , without changing ˜ µ . Then by using the version of the result already proved, we have J ˜ µ ≤ J ′ , which is equivalent to the desired relation (4.105). Q.E.D.

The preceding proof allows a relaxation of the condition (4.104). For the relation (4.106) to hold it is sufficient that ˜ J and µ satisfy the condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or the even weaker condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There is also an extension of the preceding condition for the case where m = 0, i.e., there is no rollout. It takes the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and it implies the bound J ˜ µ ≤ ˜ J . The proof is based on Eq. (4.106) where m is taken to be zero. In domain-specific contexts, the preceding conditions may be translated into meaningful results.

To prove the performance bound of Prop. 4.6.4, we focus on the discounted problem, and we make use of the contraction property of Prop. 4.3.5:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all J , J ′ , and µ , where ‖ J ‖ is the maximum norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We want to prove the following performance bound.

Proposition 4.6.4: (Performance Bound for Approximate PI) Consider the discounted problem, and let { µ k } be the sequence generated by the approximate PI algorithm defined by the approximate policy evaluation (4.44) and the approximate policy improvement (4.45). Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The essence of the proof is contained in the following lemma, which quantifies the amount of approximate policy improvement at each iteration.

Lemma 4.13.1: Consider the discounted problem, and let J , ˜ µ , and µ satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where δ and /epsilon1 are some scalars. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: The contraction property of T and T ˜ µ implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where e is the unit vector, i.e., e ( i ) = 1 for all i . Using also Eq. (4.107), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining this inequality with TJ µ ≤ T µ J µ = J µ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will show that this relation implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Indeed, by applying T ˜ µ to both sides of Eq. (4.110), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying T ˜ µ again to both sides of this relation, and continuing similarly, we have for all k ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By taking the limit as k →∞ , and by using the VI convergence property T k ˜ µ J µ → J ˜ µ , we obtain Eq. (4.111).

Using now the contraction property of T ˜ µ and Eq. (4.111), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Subtracting J * from both sides, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also from the contraction property of T ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, in conjunction with Eq. (4.109), yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining this relation with Eq. (4.112), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is equivalent to the desired relation (4.108). Q.E.D.

Proof of Prop. 4.6.4: Applying Lemma 4.13.1, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which by taking the lim sup of both sides as k →∞ yields the desired result. Q.E.D.

We next prove the performance bound for approximate PI, assuming that the generated policy sequence is convergent. For this proof we use the triangle inequality, which holds for any norm ‖ · ‖ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 4.6.5: (Performance Bound for Approximate PI when Policies Converge) Let ˜ µ be a policy generated by the approximate PI algorithm under conditions (4.44), (4.45), and (4.46). Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Let ¯ J be the cost vector obtained by approximate policy evaluation of ˜ µ . Then in view of Eqs. (4.44), (4.45), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From this relation, the fact J ˜ µ = T ˜ µ J ˜ µ , and the triangle inequality, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For every k , by using repeatedly the triangle inequality and the contraction property of T , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by taking the limit as k →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining this relation with Eq. (4.113), we obtain the desired performance bound. Q.E.D.