A way to remedy in part this difficulty is to approximate ∇ 2 f i ( ψ i,k ) by a diagonal matrix, and recursively update a diagonal approximation of D i,k using Eqs. (3.15) or (3.16). In particular, one may set to 0 the off-diagonal components of ∇ 2 f i ( ψ i,k ). In this case, the iteration (3.13) becomes a diagonally scaled version of the incremental gradient method, and involves comparable overhead per iteration (assuming the required diagonal second derivatives are easily computed or approximated). As an additional scaling option, one may multiply the diagonal components with a stepsize parameter that is close to 1 and add a small positive constant (to bound them away from 0). Ordinarily this method is easily implementable, and requires little experimentation with stepsize selection.

## 3.2 NEURAL NETWORKS

There are several different types of neural networks that can be used for a variety of tasks, such as pattern recognition, classification, image and speech recognition, and others. We focus here on our finite horizon DP context, and the role that neural networks can play in approximating the optimal cost-to-go functions J * k . As an example within this context, we may first use a neural network to construct an approximation to J * N -1 . Then we may use this approximation to approximate J * N -2 , and continue this process backwards in time, to obtain approximations to all the optimal cost-to-go functions J * k , k = 1 , . . . , N -1, as we will discuss in more detail in Section 3.3.

To describe the use of neural networks in finite horizon DP, let us consider the typical stage k , and for convenience drop the index k ; the subsequent discussion applies to each value of k separately. We consider parametric architectures ˜ J ( x, v, r ) of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that depend on two parameter vectors v and r . Our objective is to select v and r so that ˜ J ( x, v, r ) approximates some cost function that can be sampled (possibly with some error). The process is to collect a training set that consists of a large number of state-cost pairs ( x s , β s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , and to find a function ˜ J ( x, v, r ) of the form (3.17) that matches the training set in a least squares sense, i.e., ( v, r ) minimizes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Linear Layer Parameter

<!-- image -->

Cost Approximation

Figure 3.2.1 A perceptron consisting of a linear layer and a nonlinear layer. It provides a way to compute features of the state, which can be used for cost function approximation. The state x is encoded as a vector of numerical values y ( x ), which is then transformed linearly as Ay ( x ) + b in the linear layer. The m scalar output components of the linear layer, become the inputs to nonlinear functions that produce the m scalars φ /lscript ( x, v ) = σ ( ( Ay ( x ) + b ) /lscript ) , which can be viewed as features that are in turn linearly weighted with parameters r /lscript .

We postpone for later the question of how the training pairs ( x s , β s ) are generated, and how the training problem is solved. † Notice the different roles of the two parameter vectors here: v parametrizes φ ( x, v ), which in some interpretation may be viewed as a feature vector, and r is a vector of linear weighting parameters for the components of φ ( x, v ).

A neural network architecture provides a parametric class of functions ˜ J ( x, v, r ) of the form (3.17) that can be used in the optimization framework just described. The simplest type of neural network is the single layer perceptron ; see Fig. 3.2.1. Here the state x is encoded as a vector of numerical values y ( x ) with components y 1 ( x ) , . . . , y n ( x ), which is then transformed linearly as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A is an m × n matrix and b is a vector in /Rfractur m . ‡ This transformation is called the linear layer of the neural network. We view the components of A and b as parameters to be determined, and we group them together into the parameter vector v = ( A,b ).

† The least squares training problem used here is based on nonlinear regression . This is a classical method for approximating the expected value of a function with a parametric architecture, and involves a least squares fit of the architecture to simulation-generated samples of the expected value. We refer to machine learning and statistics textbooks for more discussion.

‡ The method of encoding x into the numerical vector y ( x ) is problemdependent, but it is important to note that some of the components of y ( x ) could be some known interesting features of x that can be designed based on problem-specific knowledge.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In what follows, we will ignore the character of the function σ (except for differentiability), and simply refer to it as a 'nonlinear unit' and to the corresponding layer as a 'nonlinear layer.'

At the outputs of the nonlinear units, we obtain the scalars

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 0 -1

Figure 3.2.2 The rectified linear unit σ ( ξ ) = ln(1+ e ξ ). It is the rectifier function max { 0 , ξ } with its corner 'smoothed out.' Its derivative is σ ′ ( ξ ) = e ξ / (1 + e ξ ), and approaches 0 and 1 as ξ →-∞ and ξ →∞ , respectively.

<!-- image -->

Each of the m scalar output components of the linear layer,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

becomes the input to a nonlinear differentiable function σ that maps scalars to scalars. Typically σ is differentiable and monotonically increasing. A simple and popular possibility is based on the rectifier , which is simply the function max { 0 , ξ } . In neural networks it is approximated by a differentiable function σ by some form of smoothing operation, and it is called rectified linear unit (ReLU for short); for example σ ( ξ ) = ln(1 + e ξ ), which illustrated in Fig. 3.2.2. Other functions, used since the early days of neural networks, have the property

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

see Fig. 3.2.3. Such functions are called sigmoids , and some common choices are the hyperbolic tangent function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the logistic function

Selective Depth Lookahead Tree

1 0 -1

Figure 3.2.3 Some examples of sigmoid functions. The hyperbolic tangent function is on the left, while the logistic function is on the right.

<!-- image -->

One possible interpretation is to view φ /lscript ( x, v ) as features of x , which are linearly combined using weights r /lscript , /lscript = 1 , . . . , m , to produce the final output

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that each value φ /lscript ( x, v ) depends on just the /lscript th row of A and the /lscript th component of b , not on the entire vector v . In some cases this motivates placing some constraints on individual components of A and b to achieve special problem-dependent 'handcrafted' effects.

## State Encoding and Direct Feature Extraction

The state encoding operation that transforms x into the neural network input y ( x ) can be instrumental in the success of the approximation scheme. Examples of possible state encodings are components of the state x , numerical representations of qualitative characteristics of x , and more generally features of x , i.e., functions of x that aim to capture 'important nonlinearities' of the optimal cost-to-go function. With the latter view of state encoding, we may consider the approximation process as consisting of a feature extraction mapping, followed by a neural network with input the extracted features of x , and output the cost-to-go approximation; see Fig. 3.2.4.

The idea here is that with a good feature extraction mapping, the neural network need not be very complicated (may involve few nonlinear units and corresponding parameters), and may be trained more easily. This intuition is borne out by simple examples and practical experience. However, as is often the case with neural networks, it is hard to support it with a quantitative analysis.

Cost Approximation

Figure 3.2.4 Nonlinear architecture with a view of the state encoding process as a feature extraction mapping preceding the neural network.

<!-- image -->

## 3.2.1 Training of Neural Networks

Given a set of state-cost training pairs ( x s , β s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , the parameters of the neural network A , b , and r are obtained by solving the training problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the cost function of this problem is generally nonconvex, so there may exist multiple local minima.

In practice it is common to augment the cost function of this problem with a regularization function, such as a quadratic in the parameters A , b , and r . This is customary in least squares problems in order to make the problem easier to solve algorithmically. However, in the context of neural network training, regularization is primarily important for a different reason: it helps to avoid overfitting , which refers to a situation where a neural network model matches the training data very well but does not do as well on new data. This is a well known difficulty in machine learning, which may occur when the number of parameters of the neural network is relatively large (roughly comparable to the size of the training set). We refer to machine learning and neural network textbooks for a discussion of algorithmic questions regarding regularization and other issues that relate to the practical implementation of the training process. In any case, the training problem (3.18) is an unconstrained nonconvex differentiable optimization problem that can in principle be addressed with any of the standard gradient-type methods. Significantly, it is well-suited for the incremental methods discussed in Section 3.1.3.

Let us now consider a few issues regarding the neural network formulation and training process just described:

- (a) The first issue is to select a method to solve the training problem (3.18). While we can use any unconstrained optimization method that

is based on gradients, in practice it is important to take into account the cost function structure of problem (3.18). The salient characteristic of this cost function is that it is the sum of a potentially very large number q of component functions. This makes the computation of the cost function value of the training problem and/or its gradient very costly. For this reason the incremental methods of Section 3.1.3 are universally used for training. † Experience has shown that these methods can be vastly superior to their nonincremental counterparts in the context of neural network training.

The implementation of the training process has benefited from experience that has been accumulated over time, and has provided guidelines for scaling, regularization, initial parameter selection, and other practical issues; we refer to books on neural networks such as Bishop [Bis95], Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville [GBC16], and Haykin [Hay09] for related accounts. Still, incremental methods can be quite slow, and training may be a time-consuming process. Fortunately, the training is ordinarily done off-line, in which case computation time may not be a serious issue. Moreover, in practice the neural network training problem typically need not be solved with great accuracy.

- (b) Another important question is how well we can approximate the optimal cost-to-go functions J * k with a neural network architecture, assuming we can choose the number of the nonlinear units m to be as large as we want. The answer to this question is quite favorable and is provided by the so-called universal approximation theorem . Roughly, the theorem says that assuming that x is an element of a Euclidean space X and y ( x ) ≡ x , a neural network of the form described can approximate arbitrarily closely (in an appropriate mathematical sense), over a closed and bounded subset S ⊂ X , any piecewise continuous function J : S ↦→ /Rfractur , provided the number m of nonlinear units is sufficiently large. For proofs of the theorem at different levels of generality, we refer to Cybenko [Cyb89], Funahashi [Fun89], Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White [HSW89], and Leshno et al. [LLP93]. For intuitive explanations we refer to Bishop ([Bis95], pp. 129-130) and Jones [Jon90].
- (c) While the universal approximation theorem provides some assurance about the adequacy of the neural network structure, it does not pre-

† The incremental methods are valid for an arbitrary order of component selection within the cycle, but it is common to randomize the order at the beginning of each cycle. Also, in a variation of the basic method, we may operate on a batch of several components at each iteration, called a minibatch , rather than a single component. This has an averaging effect, which reduces the tendency of the method to oscillate and allows for the use of a larger stepsize; see the end-of-chapter references.

dict how many nonlinear units we may need for 'good' performance in a given problem. Unfortunately, this is a difficult question to even pose precisely, let alone to answer adequately. In practice, one is reduced to trying increasingly larger values of m until one is convinced that satisfactory performance has been obtained for the task at hand. Experience has shown that in many cases the number of required nonlinear units and corresponding dimension of A can be very large, adding significantly to the difficulty of solving the training problem. This has given rise to many suggestions for modifications of the neural network structure. One possibility is to concatenate multiple single layer perceptrons so that the output of the nonlinear layer of one perceptron becomes the input to the linear layer of the next, as we will now discuss.

## What are the Features that can be Produced by Neural Networks?

The short answer is that just about any feature that can be of practical interest can be produced or be closely approximated by a neural network. What is needed is a single layer that consists of a sufficiently large number of nonlinear units, preceded and followed by a linear layer. This is a consequence of the universal approximation theorem. In particular it is not necessary to have more than one nonlinear layer (although it is possible that fewer nonlinear units may be needed with a deep neural network, involving more than one nonlinear layer).

To illustrate this fact, we will consider features of a scalar state variable x , and a neural network that uses the rectifier function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as the basic nonlinear unit. Thus a single rectifier preceded by a linear function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β and γ are scalars, produces the feature

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

illustrated in Fig. 3.2.6.

We can now construct more complex features by adding or subtracting single rectifier features of the form (3.19). In particular, subtracting two rectifier functions with the same slope but two different horizontal shifts β 1 and β 2 , we obtain the feature

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

γ β

Figure 3.2.6 The feature

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

produced by a rectifier preceded by the linear function L ( x ) = γ ( x -β ).

shown in Fig. 3.2.7(a). By subtracting again two features of the preceding form, we obtain the 'pulse' feature

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

shown in Fig. 3.2.7(b). The 'pulse' feature can be used in turn as a fundamental block to approximate any desired feature by a linear combination of 'pulses.' This explains how neural networks produce features of any shape by using linear layers to precede and follow nonlinear layers, at least in the case of a scalar state x . In fact, the mechanism for feature formation just described can be extended to the case of a multidimensional x , and is at the heart of the universal approximation theorem and its proof (see Cybenko [Cyb89]).

## 3.2.2 Multilayer and Deep Neural Networks

An important generalization of the single layer perceptron architecture involves a concatenation of multiple layers of linear and nonlinear functions; see Fig. 3.2.5. In particular the outputs of each nonlinear layer become the inputs of the next linear layer. In some cases it may make sense to add as additional inputs some of the components of the state x or the state encoding y ( x ).

There are a few questions to consider here. The first has to do with the reason for having multiple nonlinear layers, when a single one is sufficient to guarantee the universal approximation property. Here are some qualitative explanations:

- (a) If we view the outputs of each nonlinear layer as features, we see that the multilayer network provides a sequence of features, where each set of features in the sequence is a function of the preceding set of features in the sequence [except for the first set of features, which is a function of the encoding y ( x ) of the state x ]. Thus the

Figure 3.2.6 (a) Illustration of how the feature

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is formed by a neural network of a two-rectifier nonlinear layer, preceded by a linear layer.

(b) Illustration of how the 'pulse' feature

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is formed by a neural network of a four-rectifier nonlinear layer, preceded by a linear layer.

network produces a hierarchy of features. In the context of specific applications, this hierarchical structure can be exploited in order to specialize the role of some of the layers and to enhance particular characteristics of the state.

- (b) Given the presence of multiple linear layers, one may consider the possibility of using matrices A with a particular sparsity pattern, or other structure that embodies special linear operations such as convolution. When such structures are used, the training problem

1 0 -1 Encoding

Figure 3.2.5 A neural network with multiple layers. Each nonlinear layer constructs the inputs of the next linear layer.

<!-- image -->

often becomes easier, because the number of parameters in the linear layers is drastically decreased.

Note that while in the early days of neural networks practitioners tended to use few nonlinear layers (say one to three), more recently a lot of success in certain problem domains (including image and speech processing, as well as approximate DP) has been achieved with so called deep neural networks , which involve a considerably larger number of layers. In particular, the use of deep neural networks, in conjunction with Monte Carlo tree search, has been an important factor for the success of the computer programs AlphaGo and AlphaZero, which perform better than the best humans in the games of Go and chess; see the papers by Silver et al. [SHM16], [SHS17]. By contrast, Tesauro's backgammon program and its descendants (cf. Section 2.4.2) do not require multiple nonlinear layers for good performance at present.

## Training and Backpropagation

Let us now consider the training problem for multilayer networks. It has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v represents the collection of all the parameters of the linear layers, and φ /lscript ( x, v ) is the /lscript th feature produced at the output of the final nonlinear layer. Various types of incremental gradient methods, which modify the weight vector in the direction opposite to the gradient of a single sample term

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can also be applied here. They are the methods most commonly used in practice. An important fact is that the gradient with respect to v of

each feature φ /lscript ( x, v ) can be efficiently calculated using a special procedure known as backpropagation . This is just an intelligent way of applying the chain rule of differentiation, as we will explain now.

Multilayer perceptrons can be represented compactly by introducing certain mappings to describe the linear and the nonlinear layers. In particular, let L 1 , . . . , L m +1 denote the matrices representing the linear layers; that is, at the output of the 1st linear layer we obtain the vector L 1 x and at the output of the k th linear layer ( k &gt; 1) we obtain L k ξ , where ξ is the output of the preceding nonlinear layer. Similarly, let Σ 1 , . . . , Σ m denote the mappings representing the nonlinear layers; that is, when the input of the k th nonlinear layer ( k &gt; 1) is the vector y with components y ( j ), we obtain at the output the vector Σ k y with components σ ( y ( j ) ) . The output of the multilayer perceptron is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The special nature of this formula has an important computational consequence: the gradient (with respect to the weights) of the squared error between the output and a desired output y ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be efficiently calculated using a special procedure known as backpropagation , which is just an intelligent way of using the chain rule. † In particular, the partial derivative of the cost function E ( L 1 , . . . , L m +1 ) with respect to L k ( i, j ), the ij th component of the matrix L k , is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where e is the error vector

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Σ n , n = 1 , . . . , m , is the diagonal matrix with diagonal terms equal to the derivatives of the nonlinear functions σ of the n th hidden layer evaluated at the appropriate points, and I ij is the matrix obtained from L k by setting all of its components to 0 except for the ij th component which is set to 1. This formula can be used to obtain efficiently all of the terms needed in the partial derivatives (3.21) of E using a two-step calculation:

† The name backpropagation is used in several different ways in the neural networks literature. For example feedforward neural networks of the type shown in Fig. 3.2.5 are sometimes referred to as backpropagation networks . The somewhat abstract derivation of the backpropagation formulas given here comes from Section 3.1.1 of the book [BeT96].

- (a) Use a forward pass through the network to calculate sequentially the outputs of the linear layers

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is needed in order to obtain the points at which the derivatives in the matrices Σ n are evaluated, and also in order to obtain the error vector e = y -F ( L 1 , . . . , L m +1 , x ).

- (b) Use a backward pass through the network to calculate sequentially the terms

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the derivative formulas (3.21), starting with e ′ L m +1 Σ m , proceeding to e ′ L m +1 Σ m L m Σ m -1 , and continuing to e ′ L m +1 Σ m · · · L 2 Σ 1 .

As a final remark, we mention that the ability to simultaneously extract features and optimize their linear combination is not unique to neural networks. Other approaches that use a multilayer architecture have been proposed (see the survey by Schmidhuber [Sch15]), and they admit similar training procedures based on appropriately modified forms of backpropagation. An example of an alternative multilayer architecture approach is the Group Method for Data Handling (GMDH), which is principally based on the use of polynomial (rather than sigmoidal) nonlinearities. The GMDH approach was investigated extensively in the Soviet Union starting with the work of Ivakhnenko in the late 60s; see e.g., [Iva68]. It has been used in a large variety of applications, and its similarities with the neural network methodology have been noted (see the survey by Ivakhnenko [Iva71], and the large literature summary at the web site http://www.gmdh.net). Most of the GMDH research relates to inference-type problems, and there have not been any applications to approximate DP to date. However, this may be a fruitful area of investigation, since in some applications it may turn out that polynomial nonlinearities are more suitable than sigmoidal or rectified linear unit nonlinearities.

## 3.3 SEQUENTIAL DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING APPROXIMATION

Let us describe a popular approach for training an approximation architecture ˜ J k ( x k , r k ) for a finite horizon DP problem. The parameter vectors r k are determined sequentially, with an algorithm known as fitted value iteration , starting from the end of the horizon, and proceeding backwards as in the DP algorithm: first r N -1 then r N -2 , and so on, see Fig. 3.3.1. The algorithm samples the state space for each stage k , and generates a large number of states x s k , s = 1 , . . . , q . It then determines sequentially

1 0 -1 Encoding

Figure 3.3.1 Illustration of fitted value iteration.

<!-- image -->

the parameter vectors r k to obtain a good 'least squares fit' to the DP algorithm.

In particular, each r k is determined by generating a large number of sample states and solving a least squares problem that aims to minimize the error in satisfying the DP equation for these states at time k . At the typical stage k , having obtained r k +1 , we determine r k from the least squares problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x s k , i = 1 , . . . , q, are the sample states that have been generated for the k th stage. Since r k +1 is assumed to be already known, the complicated minimization term in the right side of this equation is the known scalar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that r k is obtained as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The algorithm starts at stage N -1 with the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ends with the calculation of r 0 at time k = 0.

In the case of a linear architecture, where the approximate cost-to-go functions are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the least squares problem (3.22) greatly simplifies, and admits the closed form solution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

cf. Eq. (3.3). For a nonlinear architecture such as a neural network, incremental gradient algorithms may be used.

An important implementation issue is how to select the sample states x s k , s = 1 , . . . , q, k = 0 , . . . , N -1. In practice, they are typically obtained by some form of Monte Carlo simulation, but the distribution by which they are generated is important for the success of the method. In particular, it is important that the sample states are 'representative' in the sense that they are visited often under a nearly optimal policy. More precisely, the frequencies with which various states appear in the sample should be roughly proportional to the probabilities of their occurrence under an optimal policy. This point will be discussed later in Chapter 4, in the context of infinite horizon problems, and the notion of 'representative' state will be better quantified in probabilistic terms.

Aside from the issue of selection of the sampling distribution that we have just described, a difficulty with fitted value iteration arises when the horizon is very long. In this case, however, the problem is often stationary, in the sense that the system and cost per stage do not change as time progresses. Then it may be possible to treat the problem as one with an infinite horizon and bring to bear additional methods for training approximation architectures; see the discussion in Chapter 4.

## 3.4 Q-FACTOR PARAMETRIC APPROXIMATION

We will now consider an alternative form of approximation in value space. It involves approximation of the optimal Q-factors of state-control pairs ( x k , u k ) at time k , without an intermediate approximation of cost-to-go functions. The optimal Q-factors are defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J * k +1 is the optimal cost-to-go function for stage k +1. Thus Q * k ( x k , u k ) is the cost attained by using u k at state x k , and subsequently using an optimal policy.

As noted in Section 1.2, the DP algorithm can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by using this equation, we can write Eq. (3.23) in the following equivalent form that relates Q * k with Q * k +1 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This suggests that in place of the Q-factors Q * k ( x k , u k ), we may use Q-factor approximations and Eq. (3.25) as the basis for suboptimal control.

We can obtain such approximations by using methods that are similar to the ones we have considered so far (parametric approximation, enforced decomposition, certainty equivalent control, etc). Parametric Q-factor approximations ˜ Q k ( x k , u k , r k ) may involve a neural network, or a featurebased linear architecture. The feature vector may depend on just the state, or on both the state and the control. In the former case, the architecture has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r k ( u k ) is a separate weight vector for each control u k . In the latter case, the architecture has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r k is a weight vector that is independent of u k . The architecture (3.26) is suitable for problems with a relatively small number of control options at each stage. In what follows, we will focus on the architecture (3.27), but the discussion with few modifications, also applies to the architecture (3.26).

We may adapt the fitted value iteration approach of the preceding section to compute sequentially the parameter vectors r k in Q-factor parametric approximations, starting from k = N -1. This algorithm is based on Eq. (3.25), with r k obtained by solving least squares problems similar to the ones of Eq. (3.22). As an example, the parameters r k of the architecture (3.27) are computed sequentially by collecting sample state-control pairs ( x s k , u s k ), s = 1 , . . . , q , and solving the linear least squares problems where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus r k is obtained through a least squares fit that aims to minimize the squared errors in satisfying Eq. (3.25). Note that the solution of the least squares problem (3.28) can be obtained in closed form as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[cf. Eq. (3.3)]. Once r k has been computed, the one-step lookahead control ˜ µ k ( x k ) is obtained on-line as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

without the need to calculate any expected value. This latter property is a primary incentive for using Q-factors in approximate DP, particularly when there are tight constraints on the amount of on-line computation that is possible in the given practical setting.

The samples β s k in Eq. (3.29) involve the computation of an expected value. In an alternative implementation, we may replace β s k with an average of just a few samples (even a single sample) of the random variable

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

collected according to the probability distribution of w k . This distribution may either be known explicitly, or in a model-free situation, through a computer simulator; cf. the discussion of Section 2.1.4. In particular, to implement this scheme, we only need a simulator that for any pair ( x k , u k ) generates a sample of the stage cost g k ( x k , u k , w k ) and the next state f k ( x k , u k , w k ) according to the distribution of w k .

Having obtained the one-step lookahead policy ˜ π = { ˜ µ 0 , . . . , ˜ µ N -1 } , a further possibility is to approximate it with a parametric architecture. This is approximation in policy space built on top of approximation in value space ; see the discussion of Section 2.1.3. The idea here is to simplify even further the on-line computation of the suboptimal controls by avoiding the minimization of Eq. (3.30).

Finally, let us note an alternative to computing Q-factor approximations. It is motivated by the potential benefit of using Q-factor differences in contexts involving approximation. In this method, called advantage updating , instead of computing and comparing Q * k ( x k , u k ) for all u k ∈ U k ( x k ), we compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The function A k ( x k , u k ) can serve just as well as Q * k ( x k , u k ) for the purpose of comparing controls, but may have a much smaller range of values

than Q * k ( x k , u k ). In the absence of approximations, advantage updating is clearly equivalent to selecting controls by comparing their Q-factors. However, when approximation is involved, using Q-factor differences can be important, because Q * k ( x k , u k ) may embody sizable quantities that are independent of u , and which may interfere with algorithms such as the fitted value iteration (3.28)-(3.29). This question is discussed further and is illustrated with an example in the neuro-dynamic programming book [BeT96], Section 6.6.2.

## 3.5 NOTES AND SOURCES

Our discussion of approximation architectures, neural networks, and training has been limited, and aimed just to provide the connection with approximate DP and a starting point for further exploration. The literature on the subject is vast, and the textbooks mentioned in the references to Chapter 1 provide detailed accounts and many references in addition to the ones given in Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2.1.

There are two broad directions of inquiry in parametric architectures:

- (1) The design of architectures, either in a general or a problem-specific context. Research in this area has intensified following the increased popularity of deep neural networks.
- (2) The algorithms for training of neural networks as well as linear architectures.

Both of these issues have been extensively investigated and research relating to these and other related issues is continuing.

Incremental algorithms are supported by substantial theoretical analysis, which addresses issues of convergence, rate of convergence, stepsize selection, and component order selection. It is beyond our scope to cover this analysis, and we refer to the book [BeT96] and paper [BeT00] by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, and the recent survey by Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal [BCN18] for theoretically oriented accounts. The author's surveys [Ber10] and [Ber15b], and convex optimization and nonlinear programming textbooks [Ber15a], [Ber16a], collectively contain an extensive account of theoretical and practical issues regarding incremental methods, including the Kaczmarz, incremental gradient, incremental subgradient, incremental aggregated gradient, incremental Newton, and incremental Gauss-Newton methods.

Fitted value iteration has a long history; it has been mentioned by Bellman among others. It has interesting properties, and at times exhibits pathological behavior, such as instability over a long horizon. We will discuss this behavior in Section 4.4 in the context of infinite horizon problems. Advantage updating (Section 3.4) was proposed by Baird [Bai93], [Bai94], and is discussed in Section 6.6 of the book [BeT96].

## Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control

by

Dimitri P. Bertsekas

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

## Chapter 4 Infinite Horizon Reinforcement Learning DRAFT

This is Chapter 4 of the draft textbook 'Reinforcement Learning and Optimal Control.' The chapter represents 'work in progress,' and it will be periodically updated. It more than likely contains errors (hopefully not serious ones). Furthermore, its references to the literature are incomplete. Your comments and suggestions to the author at dimitrib@mit.edu are welcome.

The date of last revision is given below. (A 'revision' is any version of the chapter that involves the addition or the deletion of at least one paragraph or mathematically significant equation.)

February 13, 2019

4

## Infinite Horizon Reinforcement Learning

| Contents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 4.1. An Overview of Infinite Horizon Problems . . . . . . . p. 3 4.2. Stochastic Shortest Path Problems . . . . . . . . . . p. 6 4.3. Discounted Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 16 4.4. Exact and Approximate Value Iteration . . . . . . . . p. 21 4.5. Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 25 4.5.1. Exact Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 26 4.5.2. Optimistic and Multistep Lookahead Policy Iteration p. 30 4.5.3. Policy Iteration for Q-factors . . . . . . . . . . p. 32 4.6. Approximation in Value Space - Performance Bounds . . p. 34 4.6.1. Limited Lookahead Performance Bounds . . . . . p. 36 4.6.2. Rollout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 39 4.6.3. Approximate Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . p. 43 4.7. Simulation-Based Policy Iteration with Parametric . . . . . Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 46 4.7.1. Self-Learning and Actor-Critic Systems . . . . . p. 46 4.7.2. A Model-Based Variant . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 47 |

| 4.11.                                                                                                                                                  | Approximation in Policy Space . . . . . . . . . . . p. 71 4.11.1. Training by Cost Optimization - Policy Gradient and Random Search Methods . . . . . . . . . . . p. 73   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 4.11.2. Expert Supervised                                                                                                                              | Training . . . . . . . . . . p. 80                                                                                                                                        |
| 4.12. Notes and Sources .                                                                                                                              | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 81                                                                                                                                     |
| 4.13. Mathematical                                                                                                                                     | Analysis . . . . . . . . . . p. 84                                                                                                                                        |
| Appendix: 4.13.1.                                                                                                                                      | Stochastic Shortest Path Problems . . p. 85                                                                                                                               |
| Proofs for                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                           |
| 4.13.2. Proofs for Discounted                                                                                                                          | Problems . . . . . . . . p. 90                                                                                                                                            |
| 4.13.3. Convergence of Exact                                                                                                                           | and Optimistic . . . . . . . . . . p. 91                                                                                                                                  |
| Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.13.4. Performance Bounds for One-Step Lookahead, Rollout, and Approximate Policy Iteration . . . . . . . p. | 93                                                                                                                                                                        |

In this chapter, we first provide an introduction to the theory of infinite horizon problems, and then consider the use of approximate DP/RL methods for suboptimal solution. Infinite horizon problems differ from their finite horizon counterparts in two main respects:

- (a) The number of stages is infinite.
- (b) The system is stationary, i.e., the system equation, the cost per stage, and the random disturbance statistics do not change from one stage to the next.

The assumption of an infinite number of stages is never satisfied in practice, but is a reasonable approximation for problems involving a finite but very large number of stages. The assumption of stationarity is often satisfied in practice, and in other cases it approximates well a situation where the system parameters vary relatively slowly with time.

Infinite horizon problems give rise to elegant and insightful analysis, and their optimal policies are often simpler than their finite horizon counterparts. For example, optimal policies are typically stationary, i.e., the optimal rule for choosing controls does not change from one stage to the next.

On the other hand, infinite horizon problems generally require a more sophisticated mathematical treatment. Our discussion will be limited to relatively simple finite-state problems. Still some theoretical results will be needed in this chapter. They will be explained intuitively to the extent possible, and their mathematical proofs will be provided in the end-ofchapter appendix.

## 4.1 AN OVERVIEW OF INFINITE HORIZON PROBLEMS

We will focus on two types of infinite horizon problems, where we aim to minimize the total cost over an infinite number of stages, given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

see Fig. 4.1.1. Here, J π ( x 0 ) denotes the cost associated with an initial state x 0 and a policy π = { µ 0 , µ 1 , . . . } , and α is a positive scalar. The meaning of α &lt; 1 is that future costs matter to us less than the same costs incurred at the present time.

Thus the infinite horizon costs of a policy is the limit of its finite horizon costs as the horizon tends to infinity. (We assume that the limit exists for the moment, and address the issue later.) The two types of problems, considered in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, respectively, are:

- (a) Stochastic shortest path problems (SSP for short). Here, α = 1 but there is a special cost-free termination state; once the system reaches

Figure 4.1.1 Illustration of an infinite horizon problem. The syatem and cost per stage are stationary, except for the use of a discount factor α . If α = 1, there is typically a special cost-free termination state that we aim to reach.

<!-- image -->

that state it remains there at no further cost. We will assume a problem structure such that termination is inevitable. Thus the horizon is in effect finite, but its length is random and may be affected by the policy being used.

- (b) Discounted problems . Here, α &lt; 1 and there need not be a termination state. However, we will see that a discounted problem can be readily converted to an SSP problem. This can be done by introducing an artificial termination state to which the system moves with probability 1 -α at every stage, thus making termination inevitable. As a result, our algorithms and analysis for SSP problems can be easily adapted to discounted problems.

## A Preview of Infinite Horizon Theory

There are several analytical and computational issues regarding our infinite horizon problems. Many of them revolve around the relation between the optimal cost-to-go function J * of the infinite horizon problem and the optimal cost-to-go functions of the corresponding N -stage problems.

In particular, consider the SSP case and let J N ( x ) denote the optimal cost of the problem involving N stages, initial state x , cost per stage g ( x, u, w ), and zero terminal cost. This cost is generated after N iterations of the DP algorithm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

starting from the initial condition J 0 ( x ) = 0 for all x . † The algorithm (4.1) is known as the value iteration algorithm (VI for short). Since the infinite horizon cost of a given policy is, by definition, the limit of the corresponding N -stage costs as N →∞ , it is natural to speculate that:

† This is just the finite horizon DP algorithm of Chapter 1. However, we have reversed the time indexing to suit our purposes. Thus the index of the cost functions produced by the algorithm is incremented with each iteration, and not decremented as in the case of finite horizon.

- (1) The optimal infinite horizon cost is the limit of the corresponding N -stage optimal costs as N →∞ ; i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all states x .

- (2) The following equation should hold for all states x ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is obtained by taking the limit as N →∞ in the VI algorithm (4.1) using Eq. (4.2). Equation (4.3) is really a system of equations (one equation per state x ), which has as solution the costs-to-go of all the states. It can also be viewed as a functional equation for the optimal cost function J * , and it is called Bellman's equation .

- (3) If µ ( x ) attains the minimum in the right-hand side of the Bellman equation (4.3) for each x , then the policy { µ, µ, . . . } should be optimal. This type of policy is called stationary . Intuitively, optimal policies can be found within this class of policies, since the future optimization problem when starting at a given state looks the same regardless of the time when we start.

All three of the preceding results hold for SSP problems under our assumptions, as we will state later in Section 4.2 and prove in the appendix to this chapter. They also hold for discounted problems in suitably modified form that incorporates the discount factor. In fact the algorithms and analysis of this chapter are quite similar for SSP and discounted problems, to the point where we may discuss a particular method for one of the two problems with the understanding that its application to the other problem can be straightforwardly adapted.

## Transition Probability Notation for Infinite Horizon Problems

Throughout this chapter we assume a finite-state discrete-time dynamic system, and we will use a special transition probability notation that is suitable for such a system. We generally denote states by the symbol i and successor states by the symbol j . We will assume that there are n states (in addition to the termination state for SSP problems). These states are denoted 1 , . . . , n , and the termination state is denoted t . The control u is constrained to take values in a given finite constraint set U ( i ), which may

depend on the current state i . The use of a control u at state i specifies the transition probability p ij ( u ) to the next state j , at a cost g ( i, u, j ). †

Given an admissible policy π = { µ 0 , µ 1 , . . . } [one with µ k ( i ) ∈ U ( i ) for all i and k ] and an initial state i 0 , the system becomes a Markov chain whose generated trajectory under π , denoted { i 0 , i 1 , . . . } , has a well-defined probability distribution. The total expected cost associated with an initial state i is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α is either 1 (for SSP problems) or less than 1 for discounted problems. The expected value is taken with respect to the joint distribution of the states i 1 , i 2 , . . . , conditioned on i 0 = i and the use of π . The optimal cost from state i , i.e., the minimum of J π ( i ) over all policies π , is denoted by J * ( i ).

The cost function of a stationary policy π = { µ, µ, . . . } is denoted by J µ ( i ). For brevity, we refer to π as the stationary policy µ . We say that µ is optimal if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As noted earlier, under our assumptions, we will show that there will always exist an optimal policy, which is stationary.

## 4.2 STOCHASTIC SHORTEST PATH PROBLEMS

In the SSP problem we assume that there is no discounting ( α = 1), and that there is a special cost-free termination state t . Once the system reaches that state, it remains there at no further cost, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote by 1 , . . . , n the states other than the termination state t ; see Fig. 4.2.1.

With this notation, the Bellman equation (4.3) and the VI algorithm (4.1) take the following form.

† To convert from the transition probability format to the system equation format used in the preceding chapters, we can simply use the system equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w k is the disturbance that takes values according to the transition probabilities p x k w k ( u k ).

Figure 4.2.1 The transition graph of an SSP problem. There are n states, plus the termination state t , with transition probabilities p ij ( u ). The termination state is cost-free and absorbing.

<!-- image -->

## Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for SSP Problems:

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(4.4)

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , and any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the VI algorithm generates the sequence { J k } according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The right-hand bracketed expression in the Bellman equation (4.4) represents an expected value, which is similar to the expectation we have seen in earlier DP expressions. It is the sum of three terms:

## (a) The contribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to the expected cost of the current stage of the terminating i -tot transition.

- (b) The contribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to the expected cost of the current stage of the nonterminating i -toj transitions.

- (c) The optimal expected cost-to-go

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

starting from the next state j [if the next state is t , the corresponding optimal cost is J * ( t ), which is zero, so it does not appear in the sum].

Note that the deterministic shortest path problem of Section 1.3.1 is obtained as the special case of the SSP problem where for each state-control pair ( i, u ), the transition probability p ij ( u ) is equal to 1 for a unique state j that depends on ( i, u ). Moreover, any deterministic or stochastic finitestate, finite horizon problem with a termination state (cf. Section 1.3.3) can be converted to an SSP problem. In particular, the reader may verify that the finite-state N -step horizon problem of Chapter 1 can be obtained as a special case of an SSP problem by viewing as state the pair ( x k , k ) and lumping all pairs ( x N , N ) into a termination state t .

We are interested in problems where reaching the termination state t is inevitable. Thus, the essence of the problem is to reach t with minimum expected cost. Throughout this chapter, when discussing SSP problems, we will make the following assumption, which will be shown to guarantee eventual termination under all policies. †

† The main analytical and algorithmic results for SSP problems are valid under more general conditions, which involve the notion of a proper policy (see the end-of-chapter references). In particular, a stationary policy is called proper if starting from every state, it is guaranteed to eventually reach the destination. The policy is called improper if it is not proper.

It can be shown that Assumption 4.2.1 is equivalent to the seemingly weaker assumption that all stationary policies are proper. However, the subsequent four propositions can also be shown under the genuinely weaker assumption that there exists at least one proper policy, and furthermore, every improper policy is 'bad' in the sense that it results in infinite expected cost from at least one initial state (see [BeT89], [BeT91], or [Ber12], Chapter 3). These assumptions, when specialized to deterministic shortest path problems, are similar to the assumptions of Section 1.3.1. They imply that there is at least one path to the destination from every starting state and that all cycles have positive cost. In the absence of these assumptions, the Bellman equation may have no solution or an infinite number of solutions (see [Ber18a], Section 3.1.1 for discussion of a simple example, which in addition to t , involves a single state 1 at which we can either stay at cost a or move to t at cost b ; anomalies occur when a = 0 and when a &lt; 0).

Assumption 4.2.1: (Termination is Inevitable Under All Policies) There exists an integer m such that regardless of the policy used and the initial state, there is positive probability that the termination state will be reached after no more that m stages; i.e., for all admissible policies π we have

/negationslash

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ρ be the maximum probability of not reaching t , over all starting states and policies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that ρ π depends only on the first m components of the policy π . Furthermore, since the number of controls available at each state is finite, the number of distinct m -stage policies is also finite. It follows that there can be only a finite number of distinct values of ρ π , so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that the probability of not reaching t over a finite horizon diminishes to 0 as the horizon becomes longer , regardless of the starting state and policy used.

To see this, note that for any π and any initial state i

/negationslash

/negationslash

/negationslash

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash

More generally, for each π , the probability of not reaching the termination state after km stages diminishes like ρ k regardless of the initial state, i.e.,

/negationslash

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This fact implies that the limit defining the associated total cost vector J π exists and is finite, and is central in the proof of the following results (given in the appendix to this chapter).

We now describe the main theoretical results for SSP problems; the proofs are given in the appendix to this chapter. Our first result is that the infinite horizon version of the DP algorithm, which is VI [cf. Eq. (4.1)], converges to the optimal cost function J * . The optimal cost J * ( t ) starting from t is of course 0, so it is just neglected where appropriate in the subsequent analysis. Generally, J * is obtained in the limit, after an infinite

number of iterations. However, there are important cases where convergence is obtained in finitely many iterations (see [Ber12], Chapter 3).

Proposition 4.2.1: (Convergence of VI) Given any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the sequence { J k ( i ) } generated by the VI algorithm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to the optimal cost J * ( i ) for each i = 1 , . . . , n .

Our next result is that the limiting form of the DP equation, Bellman's equation, has J * as its unique solution.

Proposition 4.2.2: (Bellman's Equation) The optimal cost function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

satisfies for all i = 1 , . . . , n , the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and is the unique solution of this equation.

Our next result expresses that by restricting attention to a single policy µ , we obtain a Bellman equation specific to µ , which has J µ as its unique solution.

Proposition 4.2.3: (VI and Bellman's Equation for Policies) =

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any stationary policy µ , the corresponding cost function J µ ( J µ (1) , . . . , J µ ( n ) ) satisfies for all i = 1 , . . . , n the equation

and is the unique solution of this equation. Furthermore, given any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the sequence { J k ( i ) } generated by the VI algorithm that is specific to µ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to the cost J µ ( i ) for each i .

Our final result provides a necessary and sufficient condition for optimality of a stationary policy.

Proposition 4.2.4: (Optimality Condition) A stationary policy µ is optimal if and only if for every state i , µ ( i ) attains the minimum in the Bellman equation (4.7).

We provide an example illustrating Bellman's equation.

## Example 4.2.1 (Maximum Expected Time to Termination)

The case where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

corresponds to a problem where the objective is to terminate as late as possible on the average, while the opposite of the optimal cost, -J ∗ ( i ), is the maximum expected time to termination starting from state i . Under our assumptions, the optimal costs J ∗ ( i ) uniquely solve Bellman's equation, which has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the special case of a single policy µ , where there is only one control at each state, -J µ ( i ) represents the expected time to reach t starting from i . This is known as the mean first passage time from i to t , and is given as the unique solution of the corresponding Bellman equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will now provide an insightful mathematical result about SSP problems, which is proved in the appendix with the aid of the preceding

example. To this end let us introduce for any vector J = ( J (1) , . . . , J ( n ) ) , the notation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , n , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all policies µ and states i = 1 , . . . , n . Here T and T µ are the DP operators that map the vector J into the vectors

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. Bellman's equations can be written in terms of these operators as the fixed point equations J * = TJ * and J µ = T µ J µ .

The next proposition states that T and T µ are contraction mappings, so the unique fixed point property of this mapping follows from general mathematical results about contraction mappings (see e.g., [Ber12], [Ber18a]). Moreover the contraction property provides a convergence rate estimate for VI, and is the basis for further analysis of exact and approximate methods for SSP problems (see the author's monograph [Ber18a] for a theoretical development of DP, which is based on fixed point theory and an abstract operator viewpoint).

Proposition 4.2.5: (Contraction Property of the DP Operator) The DP operators T and T µ of Eqs. (4.8) and (4.9) are contraction mappings with respect to some weighted norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

defined by some vector v = ( v (1) , . . . , v ( n ) ) with positive components. In other words, there exist positive scalar ρ &lt; 1 and ρ µ &lt; 1 such that for any two n -dimensional vectors J and J ′ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the weight vector v and the corresponding weighted norm may be different for T and for T µ . The proof of the proposition, given in

the appendix, shows that the weights v ( i ) and the modulus of contraction ρ are related to the maximum expected number of steps -m ∗ ( i ) to reach t from i (cf. Example 4.2.1). In particular, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Among others, the preceding contraction property provides a convergence rate estimate for VI, namely that the generated sequence { J k } satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This follows from the fact that J k and J * can be viewed as the results of the k -fold application of T to the vectors J 0 and J * , respectively.

## Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for Q-Factors

The results just given have counterparts involving Q-factors. The optimal Q-factors are defined for all i = 1 , . . . , n, and u ∈ U ( i ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As in the finite horizon case, Q * ( i, u ) can be interpreted as the cost of starting at i , using u for the first stage, and using an optimal policy afterwards. Once Q * is computed by some method, an optimal policy µ ∗ can be obtained from the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, if approximately optimal Q-factors ˜ Q ( i, u ) are obtained by some method (model-based or model-free), a suboptimal policy ˜ µ can be obtained from the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our basic results relating Bellman's equation and the VI algorithm are stated as follows.

## Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for Q-Factors and SSP Problems:

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , and u ∈ U ( i ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

State-Control Pairs

(і, и)

9(i, u, j)

Pij (u)

(j, v)

Control v

States

State-Control Pairs (

<!-- image -->

) Cost = 0 States at stage

Figure 4.2.2 States, transition probabilities, and stage costs corresponding to a modified SSP problem, which yields the optimal Q-factors as well as the optimal costs. The states of this problem are the pairs ( i, u ), u ∈ U ( i ), the original problem states i = 1 , . . . , n , and the termination state t . A control v ∈ U ( j ) is available only at the original system states j , leading to the pair ( j, v ) at cost 0. The transition from a pair ( i, u ) leads to j with probability p ij ( u ) and cost 0. The Bellman equation for this modified problem is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for the states ( i, u ), u ∈ U ( i ), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for the states j = 1 , . . . , n . Note that a policy µ for this problem leads from a state j to the state ( j, µ ( j ) ) , so in any system trajectory, only pairs of the form ( j, µ ( j ) ) are visited after the first transition.

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , and u ∈ U ( i ), and any initial conditions Q 0 ( i, u ), the VI algorithm generates the sequence { Q k } according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Actually, the optimal Q-factors Q * ( i, u ) can be viewed as optimal state costs associated with a modified SSP problem, which involves a new state for each pair ( i, u ) with transition probabilities p ij ( u ) to the states j = 1 , . . . , n, t ; see Fig. 4.2.2. Then the preceding Bellman equation for the optimal Q-factors, together with the Bellman equation (4.7) for the optimal costs J * ( j ), can be viewed as the Bellman equation for the modified SSP

problem.

## Temporal Differences and Cost Shaping

Bellman's equation can be written in an alternative form, which involves the differential

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V = ( V (1) , . . . , V ( n ) ) is any n -dimensional vector and V ( t ) = 0. In particular, by subtracting V ( i ) from both sides of the Bellman equation (4.7), and adding and subtracting V ( j ) within the right-hand side summation, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , n, where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We refer to Eq. (4.10) as the variational form of Bellman's equation , and to the modified cost per stage ˆ g as the temporal difference corresponding to V . Temporal differences play a significant role in several algorithmic RL contexts; see Section 4.9, and the approximate DP/RL books referenced earlier.

Note that Eq. (4.10) is the Bellman equation for a cost-modified problem, where the cost per stage g has been replaced by the temporal difference ˆ g . Thus by applying Prop. 4.2.2 we have that ˆ J = J * -V is the unique solution of this equation, so that J * can be obtained by solving either the original or the cost-modified version of the problem. Moreover, a policy µ , has cost function ˆ J µ = J µ -V in the cost-modified problem. It follows that the original and the cost-modified SSP problems are essentially equivalent, and the choice of V does not matter when exact DP methods are used to solve them. However, when approximate methods are used, different results may be obtained, which can be more favorable with an appropriate choice of V .

In particular, we have the option to choose V and an approximation architecture methodology that matches the differential ˆ J = J * -V better than it matches J * . For example, we may obtain V with some problem approximation scheme as a rough estimate of J * , and then use a different approximation in value space scheme, based on different principles, for the corresponding cost-modified problem. We refer to this as cost shaping (the name 'reward shaping' in used in the RL literature, for problems involving reward maximization). While cost shaping does not change the optimal policies of the original DP problem, it may change significantly the suboptimal policies produced by approximate DP methods, such as the ones that we will discuss in this chapter and the next.

## 4.3 DISCOUNTED PROBLEMS

We now consider the discounted problem, where there is a discount factor α &lt; 1. Using our transition probability notation, the Bellman equation and the VI algorithm take the following form.

## Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for Discounted Problems:

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , and any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the VI algorithm generates the sequence { J k } according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash

We will now show that the discounted problem can be converted to an SSP problem for which the analysis of the preceding section applies. To see this, let i = 1 , . . . , n be the states, and consider an associated SSP problem involving the states 1 , . . . , n plus an artificial termination state t , with state transitions and costs obtained as follows: From a state i = t , when control u is applied, the next state is j with probability αp ij ( u ) at a cost g ( i, u, j ), and t with probability 1 -α at zero cost; see Fig. 4.3.1. Note that Assumption 4.2.1 of the preceding section is satisfied for this SSP problem, since t is reached with probability 1 -α &gt; 0 from every state in a single step.

Suppose now that we use the same policy in the discounted problem and in the associated SSP problem. Then, as long as termination has not occurred, the state evolution in the two problems is governed by the same transition probabilities. Furthermore, the expected cost of the k th stage of the associated shortest path problem is the expected value of g ( i k , µ k ( i k ) , i k +1 ) multiplied by the probability that state t has not yet been reached, which is α k . This is also the expected cost of the k th stage for the discounted problem. Thus the cost of any policy starting from a given state, is the same for the original discounted problem and for the associated SSP problem.

It follows that we can apply Props. 4.2.1-4.2.5 of the preceding section to the associated SSP problem and obtain corresponding results for

Figure 4.3.1 Transition probabilities for an α -discounted problem and its associated SSP problem. In the latter problem, the probability that the state is not t after k stages is α k . The transition costs at the k th stage are g ( i, u, j ) for both problems, but they must be multiplied by α k because of discounting (in the discounted case) or because it is incurred with probability α k when termination has not yet been reached (in the SSP case).

<!-- image -->

the discounted problem, which properly incorporate the discount factor in accordance with the SSP-to-discounted equivalence just established.

Proposition 4.3.1: (Convergence of VI) Given any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the sequence { J k ( i ) } generated by the VI algorithm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to the optimal cost J * ( i ) for each i .

Proposition 4.3.2: (Bellman's Equation) The optimal cost function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

satisfies for all i = 1 , . . . , n , the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and is the unique solution of this equation.

Proposition 4.3.3: (VI and Bellman's Equation for Policies) For any stationary policy µ , the corresponding cost function J µ = ( J µ (1) , . . . , J µ ( n ) ) is the unique solution of the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, given any initial conditions J 0 (1) , . . . , J 0 ( n ), the sequence { J k ( i ) } generated by the VI algorithm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to the cost J µ ( i ) for each i .

Proposition 4.3.4: (Optimality Condition) A stationary policy µ is optimal if and only if for every state i , µ ( i ) attains the minimum in the Bellman equation (4.12).

Bellman's equation (4.12) has a familiar DP interpretation. At state i , the optimal cost J * ( i ) is the minimum over all controls of the sum of the expected current stage cost and the expected optimal cost of all future stages. The former cost is g ( i, u, j ). The latter cost is J * ( j ), but since this cost starts accumulating after one stage, it is discounted by multiplication with α .

Similar to Prop. 4.2.5, there is a contraction mapping result and convergence rate estimate for value iteration. To this end we introduce the mappings

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in analogy with their SSP counterparts of Eqs. (4.8) and (4.9). Similar to the SSP case, Bellman's equations can be written in terms of these

operators as the fixed point equations J * = TJ * J µ = T µ J µ . The following contraction result is useful for the analysis of exact and approximate methods for discounted problems.

Proposition 4.3.5: (Contraction Property of the DP Operator) The DP operators T and T µ of Eqs. (4.13) and (4.14) are contraction mappings of modulus α with respect to the maximum norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, for any two n -dimensional vectors J and J ′ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us also mention that the cost shaping idea discussed for SSP problems, extends readily to discounted problems. In particular, the variational form of Bellman's equation takes the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any given vector V , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the temporal difference corresponding to V ; cf. Eqs. (4.10) and (4.11).

## Example 4.3.1 (Asset Selling)

Consider of problem of selling an asset over an infinite number of periods. At each period an offer becomes available. We assume that offers at different periods are independent and that they can take n values v 1 , . . . , v n with corresponding probabilities according to given probability p (1) , . . . , p ( n ). Here, if accepted, the amount i k offered in period k , will be invested at a rate of interest r . By depreciating the sale amount to period 0 dollars, we view (1+ r ) -k i k as the reward for selling the asset in period k at a price i k , where r &gt; 0 is the rate of interest. Then we have a discounted reward problem with discount factor α = 1 / (1 + r ). The analysis of the present section is applicable, and the optimal value function J ∗ is the unique solution of Bellman's equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the optimal reward function is characterized by the critical number

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An optimal policy is obtained by minimizing over the two controls. It is to sell if and only if the current offer i is greater than c . The critical number c can be obtained by a simple form of VI (see [Ber17], Section 3.4.

A far more difficult version of the problem is one where the offers are correlated, so the offer at each stage may be viewed as an observation that provides information about future offers. A related difficult version of the problem is one where the probability distribution p = ( p (1) , . . . , p ( n ) ) of the offers is unknown, and is estimated as new offers are revealed. In both cases the problem can be formulated as a partial state information problem involving a belief state: the estimate of the distribution p given the past offers (suitable conditions are of course needed to ensure that the estimate of p can be in principle computed exactly or can be approximated as a practical matter). Some of the finite horizon approximation methods of Chapters 2 and 3 can be adapted to solve such a problem. However, an exact solution is practically impossible, since this would involve DP calculations over an infinite dimensional space of belief states.

## Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for Q-Factors

As in the SSP case, the results just given have counterparts involving the optimal Q-factors, defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

They can be obtained from the corresponding SSP results, by viewing the discounted problem as a special case of the SSP problem. Once Q * or an approximation ˜ Q is computed by some method (model-based or model-free), an optimal policy µ ∗ or approximately optimal policy ˜ µ can be obtained from the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or the approximate version

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our basic results relating Bellman's equation and the VI algorithm are stated as follows.

## Bellman Equation and Value Iteration for Q-Factors and Discounted Problems:

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , and u ∈ U ( i ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For all i = 1 , . . . , n , and u ∈ U ( i ), and any initial conditions Q 0 ( i, u ), the VI algorithm generates the sequence { Q k } according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The VI algorithn (4.17) forms the basis for various Q -learning methods to be discussed later.

## 4.4 EXACT AND APPROXIMATE VALUE ITERATION

We have already encountered the VI algorithm for SSP problems,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and its discounted version

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is one of the principal methods for calculating the optimal cost function J * .

Unfortunately, when the number of states is large, the iterations (4.18) and (4.19) may be prohibitively time consuming. This motivates an approximate version of VI, which is patterned after the least squares regression/fitted VI scheme of Section 3.3. We start with some initial approximation to J * , call it ˜ J 0 . Then we generate a sequence { ˜ J k } where ˜ J k +1 is equal to the exact value iterate T ˜ J k plus some error [we are using here the shorthand notation for the DP operator T given in Eqs. (4.8) and (4.13)]. Assuming that values ( T ˜ J k )( i ) may be generated for sample states i , we may obtain ˜ J k +1 by some form of least squares regression. We will now discuss how the error ( ˜ J k -J * ) is affected by this type of approximation process.

## Error Bounds and Pathologies of Approximate Value Iteration

We will focus on approximate VI for discounted problems. The analysis for SSP problems is qualitatively similar. We first consider estimates of the cost function error and the policy error

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ where the policy ˜ µ k is obtained from the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It turns out that such estimates are possible, but under assumptions whose validity may be hard to guarantee. In particular, it is natural to assume that the error in generating the value iterates ( T ˜ J k )( i ) is within some δ &gt; 0 for every state i and iteration k , i.e., that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ It is then possible to show that asymptotically, as k → ∞ , the cost error (4.20) becomes less or equal to δ/ (1 -α ), while the policy error (4.21) becomes less or equal to 2 δ/ (1 -α ) 2 .

Such error bounds are given in Section 6.5.3 of the book [BeT96] (see also Prop. 2.5.3 of [Ber12]), but it is important to note that the condition (4.22) may not be satisfied by the natural least squares regression/fitted VI scheme of Section 3.3. This is illustrated by the following simple example from [TsV96] (see also [BeT96], Section 6.5.3), which shows that the errors from successive approximate value iterations can accumulate to the point where the condition (4.22) cannot be maintained, and the approximate value iterates ˜ J k can grow unbounded.

## Example 4.4.1 (Error Amplification in Approximate Value Iteration)

Consider a two-state discounted problem with states 1 and 2, and a single policy. The transitions are deterministic: from state 1 to state 2, and from state 2 to state 2. The transitions are also cost-free; see Fig. 4.4.1. Thus the Bellman equation is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 4.4.1 Illustration of the discounted problem of Example 4.4.1. There are two states, 1 and 2, and a single policy. The transitions are deterministic: from state 1 to state 2, and from state 2 to state 2. These transitions are also cost-free.

<!-- image -->

and its unique solution is J ∗ (1) = J ∗ (2) = 0. Moreover, exact VI has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We consider a VI approach that approximates cost functions within the one-dimensional subspace of linear functions S = { ( r, 2 r ) | r ∈ /Rfractur } ; this is a favorable choice since the optimal cost function J ∗ = (0 , 0) belongs to S . We use a weighted least squares regression scheme. In particular, given ˜ J k = ( r k , 2 r k ), we find ˜ J k +1 = ( r k +1 , 2 r k +1 ) as follows; see Fig. 4.4.2:

- (a) We compute the exact VI iterate from ˜ J k :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (b) For some weights ξ 1 , ξ 2 &gt; 0, we obtain the scalar r k +1 as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To perform the preceding minimization, we write the corresponding optimality condition (set to zero the derivative with respect to r ), and obtain after some calculation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus if ξ 1 and ξ 2 are chosen so that α &gt; 1 /ζ , the sequence { r k } diverges and so does { ˜ J k } . In particular, for the natural choice ξ 1 = ξ 2 = 1, we have ζ = 6 / 5, so the approximate VI scheme diverges for α in the range (5 / 6 , 1); see Fig. 4.4.2.

The difficulty here is that the approximate VI mapping that generates ˜ J k +1 by a weighted least squares-based approximation of T ˜ J k is not a contraction (even though T itself is a contraction). At the same time there is

) Exact VI iterate Approximate

) Exact VI iterate

) Terminal State 2 0

Figure 4.4.2 Illustration of Example 4.4.1. Iterates of approximate VI lie on the line { ( r, 2 r ) | r ∈ /Rfractur } . Given an iterate ˜ J k = ( r k , 2 r k ), the next exact VI iterate is ( α ˜ J k (2) , α ˜ J k (2) ) = (2 αr k , 2 αr k ) .

<!-- image -->

The approximation of this iterate on the line { ( r, 2 r ) | r ∈ /Rfractur} by least squares regression can be viewed as weighted projection onto the line, and depends on the weights ( ξ 1 , ξ 2 ). The range of weighted projections as the weights vary is shown in the figure. For the natural choice ξ 1 = ξ 2 = 1 and α sufficiently close to 1, the new approximate VI iterate ˜ J k +1 is further away from J ∗ = (0 , 0) than ˜ J k . The difficulty here is that the mapping that consists of a VI followed by weighted projection onto the line { ( r, 2 r ) | r ∈ /Rfractur} need not be a contraction.

no δ such that the condition (4.22) is satisfied for all k , because of error amplification in each approximate VI.

The preceding example indicates that the choice of the least squares weights is important in determining the success of least squares-based approximate VI schemes. Generally, in regression-based parametric architecture training schemes of the type discussed is Section 3.1.2, the weights are related to the way samples are collected: the weight ξ i for state i is the proportion of the number of samples in the least squares summation that correspond to state i . Thus ξ 1 = ξ 2 = 1 in the preceding example means that we use an equal number of samples for each of the two states 1 and 2.

Now let us consider an approximation architecture ˜ J ( i, · ) and a sampling process for approximating the value iterates. In particular, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r k is the parameter vector corresponding to iteration k . Then the

parameter r k +1 used to represent the next value iterate as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is obtained by the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i s , β s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , is a training set with each β s being the value iterate at the state i s :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The critical question now is how to select the sample states i s , s = 1 , . . . , q , to guarantee that the iterates r k remain bounded, so that a condition of the form (4.22) is satisfied and the instability illustrated with Example 4.4.1 is avoided. It turns out that there is no known general method to guarantee this in infinite horizon problems. However, some practical methods have been developed. One such method is to weigh each state according to its 'long-term importance,' i.e., proportionally to the number of its occurrences over a long trajectory under a 'good' heuristic policy. † To implement this, we may run the system with the heuristic policy starting from a number of representative states, wait for some time for the system to approach steady-state, and record the generated states i s , s = 1 , . . . , q , to be used in the regression scheme (4.24). There is no theoretical guarantee for the stability of this scheme in the absence of additional conditions: it has been used with success in several reported case studies, although its rationale has only a tenuous basis in analysis. For a discussion of this issue, we refer to [Ber12], Section 6.3, and other end-of-chapter references.

## 4.5 POLICY ITERATION

The major alternative to value iteration is policy iteration (PI for short). This algorithm starts with a stationary policy µ 0 , and generates iteratively a sequence of new policies µ 1 , µ 2 , . . . . The algorithm has solid convergence guarantees when implemented in its exact form, as we will show shortly. When implemented in approximate form, as it is necessary when

† In the preceding Example 4.4.1, weighing the two states according to their 'long-term importance' would choose ξ 2 to be much larger than ξ 1 , since state 2 is 'much more important,' in the sense that it occurs almost exclusively in system trajectories. Indeed, from Eq. (4.23) it can be seen that when the ratio ξ 1 /ξ 2 is close enough to 0, the scalar ζ is close enough to 1, making the scalar αζ strictly less than 1, and guaranteeing convergence of ˜ J k to J ∗ .

Initial Policy

Generate "Improved" Policy H

Policy Evaluation

Policy Cost

<!-- image -->

Policy Cost Evaluation

Figure 4.5.1 Illustration of exact PI. Each iteration consists of a policy evaluation using the current policy µ , followed by generation of an improved policy ˜ µ .

the number of states is large, its performance guarantees are somewhat more favorable than those of the approximate VI of the preceding section.

The closest analog of PI that we have encountered so far is the rollout algorithm of Chapter 2. There we have started with some policy and produced an improved policy though a process of cost function evaluation and one-step or multistep minimization. This idea is extended in the context of PI, which consists of multiple successive policy evaluations and policy improvements.

## 4.5.1 Exact Policy Iteration

Consider first the SSP problem. Here, each policy iteration consists of two phases: policy evaluation and policy improvement ; see Fig. 4.5.1.

## Exact Policy Iteration: SSP Problems

Given the typical policy µ k :

Policy evaluation computes J µ k ( i ), i = 1 , . . . , n , as the solution of the (linear) system of Bellman equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(cf. Prop. 4.2.3).

Policy improvement then computes a new policy µ k +1 as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The process is repeated with µ k +1 used in place of µ k , unless we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i , in which case the algorithm terminates with the policy µ k .

The counterpart for discounted problems is as follows.

## Exact Policy Iteration: Discounted Problems

Given the typical policy µ k :

Policy evaluation computes J µ k ( i ), i = 1 , . . . , n , as the solution of the (linear) system of Bellman equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(cf. Prop. 4.2.3).

Policy improvement then computes a new policy µ k +1 as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The process is repeated with µ k +1 used in place of µ k , unless we have J µ k +1 ( i ) = J µ k ( i ) for all i , in which case the algorithm terminates with the policy µ k .

The following proposition, shown in the appendix, establishes the validity of PI, including finite termination with an optimal policy.

Proposition 4.5.1: (Convergence of Exact PI) For both the SSP and the discounted problems, the exact PI algorithm generates an improving sequence of policies, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and terminates with an optimal policy.

The proof of the policy improvement property (4.27) is quite intuitive and is worth summarizing for the discounted problem. Let µ be a policy and ˜ µ be the policy obtained from µ via a policy iteration. We want to show that J ˜ µ ≤ J µ . To this end, let us denote by J N the cost function of a policy that applies ˜ µ for the first N stages and applies µ at every subsequent stage . We have the Bellman equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which together with the policy improvement equation (4.26) imply that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the definition of J 2 and J 1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so the preceding two relations imply that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Continuing similarly, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since J N → J ˜ µ (cf. Prop. 4.3.2), it follows that J ˜ µ ≤ J µ .

In practice, a lot of cost improvement is often obtained with the PI algorithm after the first few policies are generated. This may happen even if the number of iterations needed for termination is quite large. The following is an example where termination occurs after just two iterations.

## Example 4.5.1 (Treasure Hunting)

A treasure hunter has obtained a lease to search a site that contains n treasures, and wants to find a searching policy that maximizes his expected gain over an infinite number of days. At each day, knowing the current number of

treasures not yet found, he may decide to continue searching for more treasures at a cost c per day, or to permanently stop searching. If he searches on a day when there are i treasures on the site, he finds m ∈ [0 , i ] treasures with given probability p ( m | i ), where we assume that p (0 | i ) &lt; 1 for all i ≥ 1, and that the expected number of treasures found,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is monotonically increasing with i . Each found treasure is worth 1 unit.

We formulate the problem as an SSP problem, with state equal to the number of treasures not yet found. The termination state is state 0, where the hunter stops searching. When the hunter decides to search at a state i ≥ 1, the state moves to i -m with probability p ( m | i ). Here the inevitable termination Assumption 4.2.1 is satisfied, in view of our condition p (0 | i ) &lt; 1 for all i . Bellman's equation is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with J ∗ (0) = 0 .

Let us apply PI starting with the policy µ 0 that never searches. This policy has value function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The policy µ 1 subsequently produced by PI is the one that searches at a state i if and only if r ( i ) &gt; c , and has value function satisfying the Bellman equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the values J µ 1 ( i ) are nonnegative for all i , since by Prop. 4.5.1, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The next policy generated by PI is obtained from the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For i such that r ( i ) ≤ c , we have r ( j ) ≤ c for all j &lt; i because r ( i ) is monotonically nondecreasing in i . Moreover, using Eq. (4.32), we have J µ 1 ( i -m ) = 0 for all m ≥ 0. It follows that for i such that r ( i ) ≤ c ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and µ 2 ( i ) = stop searching .

For i such that r ( i ) &gt; c , we have µ 2 ( i ) = search , since J µ 1 ( i ) ≥ 0 for all i , so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, µ 2 is the same as µ 1 and the PI algorithm terminates. By Prop. 4.5.1, it follows that µ 2 is optimal.

## 4.5.2 Optimistic and Multistep Lookahead Policy Iteration

The PI algorithm that we have discussed so far uses exact policy evaluation of the current policy µ k and one-step lookahead policy improvement, i.e., it computes exactly J µ k , and it obtains the next policy µ k +1 by a onestep lookahead minimization using J µ k as an approximation to J * . It is possible to use a more flexible algorithm whereby J µ k is approximated by any number of value iterations corresponding to µ k (cf. Prop. 4.3.3) and the policy improvement is done using multistep lookahead.

A PI algorithm that uses a finite number m k of VI steps for policy evaluation of policy µ k (in place of the infinite number required by exact PI) is referred to as optimistic . It can be viewed as a combination of VI and PI. The optimistic PI algorithm starts with a function J 0 , an initial guess of J * . It generates a sequence { J k } and an associated sequence of policies { µ k } , which asymptotically converge to J * and an optimal policy, respectively. The k th iteration starts with a function J k , and first generates µ k . It then generates J k +1 using m k iterations of the VI algorithm that corresponds to µ k , starting with J k as follows.

## Optimistic Policy Iteration: Discounted Problems

Given the typical function J k :

Policy improvement computes a policy µ k such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Optimistic policy evaluation starts with ˆ J k, 0 = J k , and uses m k VI iterations for policy µ k to compute ˆ J k, 1 , . . . , ˆ J k,m k according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , n , m = 0 , . . . , m k -1, and sets J k +1 = ˆ J k,m k .

From Eq. (4.34), it can be seen that one way to interpret optimistic PI is that we approximate J µ k by using µ k for m k stages, and adding a terminal cost function equal to the current cost estimate J k instead of using µ k for an additional infinite number of stages. Accordingly, simulationbased approximations of optimistic PI, evaluate the cost function J µ k by using m k -stage trajectories, with the cost of future stages accounted for with some cost function approximation at the end of the m k stages.

The convergence properties of optimistic PI are solid, although it may require an infinite number of iterations to converge to J * . To see why this is so, suppose that we evaluate each policy with a single VI. Then the method is essentially identical to the VI method, which requires an infinite number of iterations to converge. For the same reason, optimistic PI, when implemented with approximations similar to VI, as in Section 4.4, is subject to the instability phenomenon illustrated in Example 4.4.1. Generally, most practical approximate policy evaluation schemes are optimistic in nature.

The following proposition, shown in the appendix, establishes the validity of optimistic PI. There is a corresponding convergence property for SSP problems, but its currently available proof is fairly complicated. It is given in Section 3.5.1 of the book [Ber12]. Asynchronous versions of optimistic PI also involve theoretical convergence difficulties, which are discussed in Section 2.6.2 of [Ber12] and Section 2.6.3 of [Ber18a].

Proposition 4.5.2: (Convergence of Optimistic PI) For the discounted problem, the sequences { J k } and { µ k } generated by the optimistic PI algorithm satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of the proposition is based on the policy improvement line of proof we gave earlier. In particular, if J 0 satisfies T µ 0 J 0 ≤ J 0 , the argument of Eqs. (4.28)-(4.31) can be used to show that J * ≤ J k +1 ≤ J k for all k . Moreover, the proof of the appendix argues that we may assume that T µ 0 J 0 ≤ J 0 holds without loss of generality, since we may add a constant to J 0 without affecting the sequence { µ k } generated by the algorithm. The proof of the appendix also shows that the generated policies µ k are optimal after some k , but this fact cannot be exploited in practice because the verification that µ k is optimal requires additional computations that essentially defeat the purpose of the method.

## Multistep Policy Improvement

The motivation for multistep policy improvement is that it may yield a

better policy µ k +1 than with one-step lookahead. In fact this makes even more sense when the evaluation of µ k is approximate, since then the longer lookahead may compensate for errors in the policy evaluation. The method in its exact nonoptimistic form is given below (in a different version it may be combined with optimistic PI, i.e., with policy evaluation done using a finite number of VI iterations).

## Multistep Lookahead Exact Policy Iteration: Discounted Problems

Given the typical policy µ k :

Policy evaluation computes J µ k ( i ), i = 1 , . . . , n , as the solution of the (linear) system of Bellman equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(cf. Prop. 4.2.3).

Policy improvement with /lscript -step lookahead then solves the /lscript -stage problem with terminal cost function J µ k . If { ˆ µ 0 , . . . , ˆ µ /lscript -1 } is the optimal policy of this problem, then the new policy µ k +1 is ˆ µ 0 .

The process is repeated with µ k +1 used in place of µ k , unless we have J µ k +1 ( i ) = J µ k ( i ) for all i , in which case the algorithm terminates with the policy µ k .

Exact PI with multistep lookahead has the same solid convergence properties as its one-step lookahead counterpart: it terminates with an optimal policy, and the generated sequence of policies is monotonically improving. The proof is based on a cost improvement property that will be shown as a special case of the subsequent Prop. 4.6.1.

## 4.5.3 Policy Iteration for Q-factors

Similar to VI, we may also equivalently implement PI through the use of Q-factors. To see this, first note that the policy improvement step may be implemented by minimizing over u ∈ U ( i ) the expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which we view as the Q-factor of the pair ( i, u ) corresponding to µ . Note that we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->