Initial Policy

Generate "Improved" Policy It

Policy Q-Factor Evaluation

Policy Q-Factor

<!-- image -->

Policy Q-Factor Evaluation

Figure 4.5.2 Block diagram of exact PI for Q-factors. Each iteration consists of a policy evaluation using the current policy µ , followed by generation of an improved policy ˜ µ .

(cf. Prop. 4.2.3).

The following algorithm is thus obtained; see Fig. 4.5.2.

## Exact Policy Iteration for Q-Factors: Discounted Problems

Given the typical policy µ k :

Policy evaluation computes Q µ k ( i, u ), for all i = 1 , . . . , n, and u ∈ U ( i ), as the solution of the (linear) system of equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Policy improvement then computes a new policy µ k +1 as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The process is repeated with µ k +1 used in place of µ k , unless we have J µ k +1 ( i ) = J µ k ( i ) for all i , in which case the algorithm terminates with the policy µ k .

Note that the system (4.35) has a unique solution, since from the uniqueness of solution of Bellman's equation, any solution must satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence the Q-factors Q µ k ( j, µ k ( j ) ) are uniquely determined, and then the remaining Q-factors Q µ k ( i, u ) are also uniquely determined from Eq. (4.35).

The PI algorithm for Q-factors is mathematically equivalent to PI for costs, as given in the preceding subsection. The only difference is that we calculate all the Q-factors Q µ k ( i, u ), rather than just the costs J µ k ( j ) = Q µ k ( j, µ k ( j ) ) , i.e., just the Q-factors corresponding to the controls chosen by the current policy. However, the remaining Q-factors Q µ k ( i, u ) are needed for the policy improvement step (4.36), so no extra computation is required. It can be verified also that the PI algorithm (4.35)-(4.36) can be viewed as the PI algorithm for the discounted version of the modified problem of Fig. 4.2.2. Asynchronous and optimistic PI algorithms for Q-factors involve substantial theoretical convergence complications, as shown by Williams and Baird [WiB93], which have been resolved in papers by Bertsekas and Yu for discounted problems in [BeY12] and for SSP problems in [YuB13a].

## 4.6 APPROXIMATION IN VALUE SPACE - PERFORMANCE BOUNDS

We will focus on infinite horizon DP approximations, beginning with discounted problems. Consistently with the finite horizon approximation in value space schemes of Chapter 2, the general idea is to compute some approximation ˜ J of the optimal cost function J * , and then use one-step or multistep lookahead to implement a suboptimal policy ˜ µ . Thus, a onestep lookahead policy applies at state i the control ˜ µ ( i ) that attains the minimum in the expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

see Fig. 4.6.1.

Similarly, at state i , a two-step lookahead policy applies the control ˜ µ ( i ) attaining the minimum in the preceding equation, where now ˜ J is obtained itself on the basis of a one-step lookahead approximation. In other words, for all states j that can be reached from i , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˆ J is some approximation of J * . Thus ˜ J is the result of a single value iteration starting from ˆ J . Policies with lookahead of more than two stages are similarly defined. In particular, the 'effective one-step' cost approximation ˜ J in /lscript -step lookahead is the result of /lscript -1 successive value iterations starting from some initial approximation ˆ J . Otherwise expressed,

ulation Monte-Carlo Tree Search (certainty equivalence)

Approximate PI Range of Weighted Projections

Simple choices Parametric approximation Problem approximation

Figure 4.6.1 Schematic illustration of various options for approximation in value space with one-step lookahead in infinite horizon problems. The lookahead function values ˜ J ( j ) approximate the optimal cost-to-go values J ∗ ( j ), and can be computed by a variety of methods. There may be additional approximations in the minimization over u k and the computation of the expected value.

<!-- image -->

/lscript -step lookahead with ˆ J at the end is the same as one-step lookahead with T /lscript -1 ˆ J at the end , where T is the DP operator (4.13).

In Chapter 2 we gave several types of limited lookahead schemes, where ˜ J is obtained in different ways, such as problem approximation, rollout, and others. Several of these schemes can be fruitfully adapted to infinite horizon problems; see Fig. 4.6.1.

In this chapter, we will focus on rollout, and particularly on approximate PI schemes, which operate as follows:

- (a) Several policies µ 0 , µ 1 , . . . , µ m are generated, starting with an initial policy µ 0 .
- (b) Each policy µ k is evaluated approximately, with a cost function ˜ J µ k , often with the use of a parametric approximation/neural network approach.
- (c) The next policy µ k +1 is generated by one-step or multistep policy improvement based on ˜ J µ k .
- (d) The approximate evaluation ˜ J µ m of the last policy in the sequence is used as the lookahead approximation ˜ J in the one-step lookahead minimization (4.37), or its multistep counterpart.

Performance bounds for this type of approximate PI scheme will be discussed in Section 4.6.3, following a discussion of general performance bounds and rollout in the next two subsections. Note that rollout can be viewed as

the extreme special case of the preceding approximate PI procedure, where m = 0, and only the policy µ 0 is evaluated and used for a single policy improvement.

## 4.6.1 Limited Lookahead Performance Bounds

We will now consider performance bounds for /lscript -step lookahead. In particular, if ˆ µ 0 , . . . , ˆ µ /lscript -1 attain the minimum in the /lscript -step lookahead minimization below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we consider the suboptimal policy ˜ µ = ˆ µ 0 . We will refer to ˜ µ as the /lscript -step lookahead policy corresponding to ˜ J . Equivalently, in the shorthand notation of the DP operators T and T ˜ µ of Eqs. (4.13) and (4.14), the /lscript -step lookahead policy ˜ µ is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In part (a) of the following proposition, we will derive a bound for the performance of ˜ µ .

We will also derive a bound for the case of a useful generalized onestep lookahead scheme [part (b) of the following proposition]. This scheme aims to reduce the computation to obtain ˜ µ ( i ), by performing the lookahead minimization over a subset U ( i ) ⊂ U ( i ). Thus, the control ˜ µ ( i ) used in this scheme is one that attains the minimum in the expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is attractive when by using some heuristic or approximate optimization, we can identify a subset U ( i ) of promising controls, and to save computation, we restrict attention to this subset in the one-step lookahead minimization.

## Proposition 4.6.1: (Limited Lookahead Performance Bounds)

- (a) Let ˜ µ be the /lscript -step lookahead policy corresponding to ˜ J . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ‖ · ‖ denotes the maximum norm (4.15).

- (b) Let ˜ µ be the one-step lookahead policy obtained by minimization in the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where U ( i ) ⊂ U ( i ) for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Assume that for some constant c , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An important point regarding the bound (4.38) is that J ˜ µ is unaffected by a constant shift in ˜ J [an addition of a constant to all values ˜ J ( i )]. Thus ‖ ˜ J -J * ‖ in Eq. (4.38) can be replaced by the potentially much smaller number

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We thus obtain the following performance bound,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is stronger than the one of Eq. (4.38) that corresponds to β = 0.

The preceding bound shows that performance is improved when the length /lscript of the lookahead in increased, and also when the lookahead cost approximation ˜ J is closer to the optimal cost J * (when modified with an optimal constant shift β ). Both of these conclusions are intuitive and also consistent with practical experience. Note that we are not asserting that multistep lookahead will lead to better performance than one-step lookahead; we know that this not is necessarily true (cf. Example 2.2.1). It is the performance bound that is improved when multistep lookahead is used.

Regarding the condition (4.40), we note that it guarantees that when c ≤ 0, the cost J ˜ µ of the one-step lookahead policy is no larger than ˜ J . When c = 0, this condition bears resemblance with the consistent improvement condition for deterministic rollout methods (cf. Section 2.4.1). If ˜ J = J µ for some policy µ (as in the case of the pure form of rollout to

Cost = 0

Cost =

Policy H*

Cost = 20€

Cost = 0

<!-- image -->

Cost = 0 Cost =

Figure 4.6.2 A two-state problem for proving the tightness of the performance bound of Prop. 4.6.1(b) (cf. Example 4.6.1). All transitions are deterministic as shown, but at state 1 there are two possible decisions: move to state 2 (policy µ ∗ ) or stay at state 1 (policy µ ). The cost of each transition is shown next to the corresponding arc.

be discussed in Section 4.6.2), then Eq. (4.40) holds as an equation with c = 0, and from Eq. (4.41), it follows that J ˜ µ ≤ J µ .

Unfortunately, the bound (4.38) is not very reassuring when α is close to 1. Nonetheless, the following example shows that the bound is tight in very simple problems with just two states. What is happening here is that an O ( /epsilon1 ) difference in single stage cost between two controls can generate an O ( /epsilon1/ (1 -α ) ) difference in policy costs, yet it can be 'nullified' in Bellman's equation by an O ( /epsilon1 ) difference between J * and ˜ J .

## Example 4.6.1

Consider the two-state discounted problem shown in Fig. 4.6.2, where /epsilon1 is a positive scalar and α ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. The optimal policy µ ∗ is to move from state 1 to state 2, and the optimal cost-to-go function is J ∗ (1) = J ∗ (2) = 0. Consider the cost function approximation ˜ J with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that as assumed in Eq. (4.38) [cf. Prop. 4.6.1(b)]. The policy µ that decides to stay at state 1 is a one-step lookahead policy based on ˜ J , because

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so the bound of Eq. (4.38) holds with equality.

## 4.6.2 Rollout

Let us first consider rollout in its pure form, where ˜ J in Eq. (4.37) is the cost function of some stationary policy µ (also called the base policy or base heuristic ), i.e., ˜ J = J µ . Thus, the rollout policy is the result of a single policy iteration starting from µ . The policy evaluation that yields the costs J µ ( j ) needed for policy improvement may be done in any suitable way. Monte-Carlo simulation (averaging the costs of many trajectories starting from j ) is one major possibility. Of course if the problem is deterministic, a single simulation trajectory starting from j is sufficient, in which case the rollout policy is much less computationally demanding. Note also that in discounted problems the simulated trajectories must be truncated after a number of transitions, which is sufficiently large to make the cost of the remaining transitions insignificant in view of the discount factor.

An important fact is that in the pure form of rollout, the rollout policy improves over the base policy , as the following proposition shows. This is to be expected since rollout is one-step PI, so Prop. 4.5.1 applies.

Proposition 4.6.2: (Cost Improvement by Rollout) Let ˜ µ be the rollout policy obtained by the one-step lookahead minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ is a base policy [cf. Eq. (4.39) with ˜ J = J µ ] and we assume that µ ( i ) ∈ U ( i ) ⊂ U ( i ) for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Then J ˜ µ ≤ J µ .

Let us also mention the variation of rollout that uses multiple base heuristics, and simultaneously improves on all of them. This variant, also called parallel rollout because of its evident parallelization potential, extends its finite horizon counterpart; cf. Section 2.4.1.

## Example 4.6.2 (Rollout with Multiple Heuristics)

Let µ 1 , . . . , µ M be stationary policies, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

let U ( i ) ⊂ U ( i ), and assume that µ 1 ( i ) , . . . , µ M ( i ) ∈ U ( i ) for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Then, for all i and m = 1 , . . . , M , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Selective Depth Lookahead Tree

Variable Length Rollout Selective Depth Rollout Policy

Base Heuristic

Figure 4.6.3 Illustration of two-step lookahead, rollout with a policy µ for a limited and state-dependent number of steps, and a terminal cost function approximation ˜ J . A Monte Carlo tree search scheme may also be used for multistep lookahead; cf. Section 2.4.2. Note that the three components of this scheme (multistep lookahead, rollout with µ , and cost approximation ˜ J ) can be designed independently of each other. Moreover, while the multistep lookahead is implemented on-line, µ and ˜ J must be available from an earlier off-line computation.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which, by taking minimum of the right-hand side over m , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Prop. 4.6.1(a), we see that the rollout policy ˜ µ , obtained by using ˜ J as one-step lookahead approximation satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e., it improves over each of the policies µ 1 , . . . , µ M .

## Combined Multistep Lookahead, Rollout, and Terminal Cost Approximation

Let us next discuss a variant of the rollout approach, whereby we use /lscript -step lookahead, we then apply rollout with policy µ for a limited number of steps, and finally we approximate the cost of the remaining steps using some terminal cost approximation ˜ J ; see Fig. 4.6.3. We can view this form of rollout as a single optimistic policy iteration combined with multistep lookahead ; cf. Eqs. (4.33)-(4.34). This type of algorithm was used in Tesauro's rollout-based backgammon player [TeG96] (it was also used in AlphaGo in a modified form, with Monte Carlo tree search in place of ordinary limited lookahead). We will give more details later.

The following result generalizes the performance bounds given for limited lookahead and rollout of the preceding two subsections. In particular, part (a) of the proposition follows by applying Prop. 4.6.1(a), since the truncated rollout scheme of this section can be viewed as /lscript -step approximation in value space with terminal cost function T µ m ˜ J at the end of the lookahead, where T µ is the DP operator of Eq. (4.14).

Proposition 4.6.3: (Performance Bound of Rollout with Terminal Cost Function Approximation) Let /lscript and m be positive integers, let µ be a policy, and let ˜ J be a function of the state. Consider a truncated rollout scheme consisting of /lscript -step lookahead, followed by rollout with a policy µ for m steps, and a terminal cost function approximation ˜ J at the end of the m steps. Let ˜ µ be the policy generated by this scheme.

- (a) We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T µ is the DP operator of Eq. (4.14), and ‖ · ‖ denotes the maximum norm (4.15).

- (b) Assume that for some constant c , ˜ J and µ satisfy the condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , n . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a special case of part (b) of the preceding proposition, suppose that the terminal cost function ˜ J approximates within c/ (1 + α ) the cost function of µ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then Eq. (4.42) is satisfied since we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proposition then shows that multistep lookahead followed by infinite step rollout with µ produces a rollout policy ˜ µ with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i . Thus, if ˜ J is nearly equal to J µ , then ˜ µ nearly improves over µ [within 2 c/ (1 -α 2 )].

There is also an extension for the case where m = 0, i.e., when there is no rollout with a policy µ . It states that under the condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the multistep lookahead policy ˜ µ satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i . This performance bound is similar to fairly old bounds that date to the mid-90s; see Prop. 6.1.1 in the author's book [Ber17] (and its earlier editions). It extends Prop. 4.6.1(b) from one-step to multistep lookahead approximation in value space schemes.

Regarding the nature of the terminal cost approximation ˜ J in truncated rollout schemes, it may be heuristic, based on problem approximation, or based on a more systematic simulation methodology. For example,

the values J µ ( i ) may be computed by simulation for all i in a subset of representative states, and ˜ J may be selected from a parametric class of vectors by a least squares regression of the computed values. This approximation may be performed off-line, outside the time-sensitive restrictions of a real-time implementation, and the result ˜ J may be used on-line in place of J µ as a terminal cost function approximation. Note, however, that once cost function approximation is introduced at the end of the rollout, the cost improvement property of the rollout policy over the base policy may be lost.

The truncated rollout scheme of Fig. 4.6.3 has been adopted in the rollout backgammon algorithm of Tesauro and Galperin [TeG96], with µ and the terminal cost function approximation ˜ J provided by the TDGammon algorithm of Tesauro [Tes94], which was based on a neural network, trained using a form of optimistic policy iteration and TD( λ ). A similar type of algorithm was used in the AlphaGo program (Silver et al. [SHM16]), with the policy and the terminal cost function obtained with a deep neural network, trained using a form of approximate policy iteration. Also the multistep lookahead in the AlphaGo algorithm was implemented using Monte Carlo tree search (cf. Section 2.4.2).

## 4.6.3 Approximate Policy Iteration

When the number of states is very large, the policy evaluation step and/or the policy improvement step of the PI method may be implementable only through approximations. In an approximate PI scheme, each policy µ k is evaluated approximately, with a cost function ˜ J µ k , often with the use of a feature-based architecture or a neural network, and the next policy µ k +1 is generated by (perhaps approximate) policy improvement based on ˜ J µ k .

To formalize this type of procedure, we assume an approximate policy evaluation error satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and an approximate policy improvement error satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where δ and /epsilon1 are some nonnegative scalars. The following proposition, proved in the appendix (and also in the original source [BeT96], Section 6.2.2), provides a performance bound for discounted problems (a similar result is available for SSP problems; see [BeT96], Section 6.2.2).

J*

0

1

2

Figure 4.6.4 Illustration of typical behavior of approximate PI. In the early iterations, the method tends to make rapid and fairly monotonic progress, until J µ k gets within an error zone of size less than ( /epsilon1 +2 αδ ) / (1 -α ) 2 . After that J µ k oscillates randomly within that zone.

<!-- image -->

Proposition 4.6.4: (Performance Bound for Approximate PI) Consider the discounted problem, and let { µ k } be the sequence generated by the approximate PI algorithm defined by the approximate policy evaluation (4.44) and the approximate policy improvement (4.45). Then the policy error

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

becomes less or equal to asymptotically as k →∞ .

The preceding performance bound is not particularly useful in practical terms. Significantly, however, it is in qualitative agreement with the empirical behavior of approximate PI. In the beginning, the method tends to make rapid and fairly monotonic progress, but eventually it gets into an oscillatory pattern. This happens after J µ k gets within an error zone of size ( δ + 2 /epsilon1 ) / (1 -α ) 2 or smaller, and then J µ k oscillates fairly randomly within that zone; see Fig. 4.6.4. In practice, the error bound of Prop. 4.6.4 tends to be pessimistic, so the zone of oscillation is usually much narrower than what is suggested by the bound. However, the bound itself can be

J*

1

2

•• •

<!-- image -->

Error Zone

Figure 4.6.5 Illustration of typical behavior of approximate PI when policies converge. The method tends to make monotonic progress, and J µ k converges within an error zone of size less than

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

proved to be tight, in worst case. This is shown with an example in the book [BeT96], Section 6.2.3. Note also that the bound of Prop. 4.6.4 holds in the case of infinite state and control spaces discounted problems, when there are infinitely many policies (see [Ber18a], Prop. 2.4.3).

We finally note that since the set of policies is finite, the sequence { J µ k } is guaranteed to be bounded, so approximate PI is not hampered by the instability that was highlighted by Example 4.4.1 for approximate VI.

## Performance Bound for the Case Where Policies Converge

Generally, the policy sequence { µ k } generated by approximate PI may oscillate between several policies, as noted earlier. However, under some circumstances the sequence will converge to some policy ˜ µ , in the sense that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An important case where this happens is aggregation methods, which will be discussed in Chapter 5. In this case the behavior of the method is more regular, and we can show a more favorable bound than the one of Prop. 4.6.4, by a factor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

see Fig. 4.6.5.

Proposition 4.6.5: (Performance Bound for Approximate PI when Policies Converge) Let ˜ µ be a policy generated by the approximate PI algorithm under conditions (4.44), (4.45), and (4.46). Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We finally note that similar performance bounds can be obtained for optimistic PI methods, where the policy evaluation is performed with just a few approximate value iterations, and policy improvement is approximate (cf. Section 4.5.2). These bounds are similar to the ones of the nonoptimistic PI case given in this section, but their derivation is quite complicated; see [Ber12], Chapter 2, or [Ber18a], Section 2.5.2, and the end-of-chapter references. It should be noted, however, that in the absence of special modifications, optimistic PI with approximations is subject to the error amplification phenomenon illustrated in Example 4.4.1. Indeed approximate VI, as described in Section 4.4, can be viewed as a special case of an optimistic PI method, where each policy evaluation is done with a single VI, and then approximated by least squares/regression.

## 4.7 SIMULATION-BASED POLICY ITERATION WITH PARAMETRIC APPROXIMATION

In this section we will discuss PI methods where the policy evaluation step is carried out with the use of a parametric approximation method and Monte-Carlo simulation. We will focus on the discounted problem, but similar methods can be used for SSP problems.

## 4.7.1 Self-Learning and Actor-Critic Systems

The name 'self-learning' in RL usually refers to some form of PI method that involves the use of simulation for approximate policy evaluation, and/or approximate Q-factor evaluation. A parametric architecture is used for this, and the algorithm that performs the policy evaluation is usually called a critic . If a neural network is used as the parametric architecture, it is called a critic network . The PI algorithm generates a sequence of stationary policies { µ k } and a corresponding sequence of approximate cost function evaluations { ˜ J µ k } using a simulator of the system.

As in all PI methods, the policy evaluation ˜ J µ k is used for policy improvement, to generate the next policy µ k +1 . The algorithm that performs

the policy improvement is usually called an actor , and if a neural network is involved, it is called an actor network .

The two operations needed at each policy iteration are as follows:

- (a) Evaluate the current policy µ k (critic) : Here algorithm, system, and simulator are merged in one, and the system 'observes itself' by generating simulation cost samples under the policy µ k . It then combines these samples to 'learn' a policy evaluation ˜ J µ k . Usually this is done through some kind of incremental method that involves a least squares minimization using cost samples, and either a linear architecture or a neural network.
- (b) Improve the current policy µ k (actor) : Given the approximate policy evaluation ˜ J µ k , the system can generate or 'learn' the new policy µ k +1 through the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Alternatively the system can compute the minimizing control u s at a set of sample states i s , s = 1 , . . . , q , through

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These are the sample values of the improved policy µ k +1 at the sample states i s . They are generalized to 'learn' a complete policy µ k +1 by using some approximation in policy space scheme (cf. Section 2.1.3).

We can thus describe simulation-based PI as a process where the system learns better and better policies by observing its behavior . This is true up to the point where either policy oscillations occur (cf. Fig. 4.6.4) or the algorithm terminates (cf. Fig. 4.6.5), at which time learning essentially stops.

It is worth noting that the system learns by itself, but it does not learn itself, in the sense that it does not construct a mathematical model for itself . It only learns to behave better, i.e., construct improved policies, through experience gained by simulating state and control trajectories generated with these policies. We may adopt instead an alternative two-phase approach: first use system identification and simulation to construct a mathematical model of the system, and then use a model-based PI method. However, we will not discuss this approach in this book.

## 4.7.2 A Model-Based Variant

We will first provide an example of a model-based PI method that is conceptually simple, and then discuss its model-free version. In particular, we

Initial Policy

Approximate Policy

Critic

)

Figure 4.7.1 Block diagram of model-based approximate PI for cost functions.

<!-- image -->

assume that the transition probabilities p ij ( u ) are available, and that the cost function J µ of any given policy µ is approximated using a parametric architecture ˜ J µ ( i, r ).

We recall that given any policy µ , the exact PI algorithm for costs [cf. Eqs. (4.34)-(4.33)] generates the new policy ˜ µ with a policy evaluation/policy improvement process. We approximate this process as follows; see Fig. 4.7.1.

- (a) Approximate policy evaluation : To evaluate µ , we determine the value of the parameter vector r by generating a large number of training pairs ( i s , β s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , and by using least squares training:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a given state i s , the scalar β s is a sample cost corresponding to i s and µ .

In particular β s is generated by starting at i s , simulating a trajectory of states and controls using µ and the known transition probabilities for some number N of stages, accumulating the corresponding discounted costs, and adding a terminal cost approximation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i N is the terminal state of the N -stage trajectory and ˆ J is some initial guess of J µ . The guess ˆ J may be obtained with additional training or some other means, such as using the result of the policy

Initial Policy

Approximate Policy

Critic

)

Figure 4.7.1 Block diagram of model-based approximate PI for cost functions.

<!-- image -->

evaluation of the preceding policy µ k -1 ; this is similar to the cost function approximation implicitly used in optimistic policy iteration, cf. Section 4.5.2. It is also possible to simplify the method by using ˆ J ( i N ) = 0, or obtaining ˆ J via a problem approximation process.

The approximate policy evaluation problem of Eq. (4.47) can be solved with the incremental methods discussed in Section 3.1.3. In particular the incremental gradient method is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i s k , β s k ) is the state-cost sample pair that is used at the k th iteration, and r 0 is an initial parameter guess. Here the approximation architecture ˜ J ( i, r ) may be linear or may be nonlinear and differentiable. In the case of a linear architecture it is also possible to solve the problem (4.47) using the exact linear least squares formula.

- (b) Approximate policy improvement : Having solved the approximate policy evaluation problem (4.47), the new 'improved' policy ˜ µ is obtained by the approximate policy improvement operation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r is the parameter vector obtained from the policy evaluation operation (4.47).

## Trajectory Reuse and Bias-Variance Tradeoff

As we have noted, to each training pair ( i s , β s ) there corresponds an N -stage trajectory over which the sample cost β s is accumulated, but the length of the trajectory may depend on s . This allows sampling effort economies based on trajectory reuse . In particular, suppose that starting at some state i 0 we generate a long trajectory ( i 0 , i 1 , . . . , i N ) using the policy µ . Then we can obtain the state-cost sample that corresponds to i 0 , as discussed above, but we can also obtain additional cost samples for the subsequent states i 1 , i 2 , etc, by using the tail portions of the trajectory ( i 0 , i 1 , . . . , i N ) that start at these states.

Clearly, it is necessary to truncate the sample trajectories to some number of stages N , since we cannot simulate an infinite length trajectory in practice. If N is large, then because of the discount factor, the error for neglecting the stage costs beyond stage N will be small. However, there are other important concerns when choosing the trajectory lengths N .

In particular, a short length reduces the sampling effort, but is also a source of inaccuracy. The reason is that the cost of the tail portion of the trajectory (from stage N to infinity) is approximated by α N ˆ J ( i N ), where i N is the terminal state of the N -stage trajectory and ˆ J is the initial guess of J µ . This terminal cost compensates for the costs of the neglected stages in the spirit of optimistic PI, but adds an error to the cost samples β s , which becomes larger as the trajectory length N becomes smaller.

We note two additional benefits of using many training trajectories, each with a relatively short trajectory length:

- (1) The cost samples β s are less noisy, as they correspond to summation of fewer random stage costs. This leads to the so-called bias-variance tradeoff : short trajectories lead to larger bias but smaller variance of the cost samples.
- (2) With more starting states i 0 , there is better opportunity for exploration of the state space . By this we mean adequate representation of all possible initial trajectory states in the sample set. This is a major issue in approximate PI, as we will discuss in Section 4.7.4.

Let us also note that the bias-variance tradeoff underlies the motivation for a number of alternative policy evaluation methods such as TD( λ ), LSTD( λ ), and LSPE( λ ), which we will summarize in Section 4.9; see Section 6.3 of the book [Ber12] and other approximate DP/RL books referenced earlier. The papers [Ber11b], [YuB12], and the book [Ber12], Section 6.4, discuss a broad range of short trajectory sampling methods.

## 4.7.3 A Model-Free Variant

We will now provide an example model-free PI method. Let us restate the PI method in terms of Q-factors, and in a form that involves approx-

Initial Policy

Qu(i, u, T) of Current Policy u

Generate "Improved" Policy M

Figure 4.7.2 Block diagram of model-free approximate PI for Q-factors.

<!-- image -->

imations and simulation-based implementations. We recall that given any policy µ , the exact PI algorithm for Q-factors [cf. Eqs. (4.35)-(4.36)] generates the new policy ˜ µ with a policy evaluation-policy improvement process. We approximate this process as follows; see Fig. 4.7.2.

- (a) Approximate policy evaluation : Here we introduce a parametric architecture ˜ Q µ ( i, u, r ) for the Q-factors of µ . We determine the value of the parameter vector r by generating (using a simulator of the system) a large number of training triplets ( i s , u s , β s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , and by using a least squares fit:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, for a given pair ( i s , u s ), the scalar β s is a sample Qfactor corresponding to ( i, u ). It is generated by starting at i s , using u s at the first stage, and simulating a trajectory of states and controls using µ for a total of N stages, and accumulating the corresponding discounted costs. Thus, β s is a sample of Q N µ ( i s , u s ), the N -stage Q-factor of µ , given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J N -1 µ ( j ) is the ( N -1)-stages cost of µ starting at j . The number of stages N in the sample trajectories may be different for

Evaluation

different samples, and can be either large, or fairly small, and a terminal cost α N ˆ J ( i N ) may be added as in the model-based case of Section 4.7.2. Again an incremental method may be used to solve the training problem (4.49).

- (b) Approximate policy improvement : Here we compute the new policy ˜ µ according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r is the parameter vector obtained from the policy evaluation operation (4.49).

/negationslash

Unfortunately, trajectory reuse is more problematic in Q -factor evaluation than in cost evaluation, because each trajectory generates statecontrol pairs of the special form ( i, µ ( i ) ) at every stage after the first, so pairs ( i, u ) with u = µ ( i ) are not adequately explored ; cf. the discussion in Section 4.7.2. For this reason, it is necessary to make an effort to include in the samples a rich enough set of trajectories that start at pairs ( i, u ) with u = µ ( i ).

/negationslash

An important alternative to the preceding procedure is a two-stage process for policy evaluation: first compute in model-free fashion a cost function approximation ˜ J µ ( j, r ), using the regression (4.47), and then use a second sampling process and regression to approximate further the (already approximate) Q-factor

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with some ˜ Q µ ( i, u, r ) possibly obtained with a policy approximation architecture (see the discussion of Section 2.1.3 on model-free approximation in policy space). Finally, once ˜ Q µ ( i, u, r ) is obtained with this approximation in policy space, the 'improved' policy ˜ µ is obtained from the minimization (4.50). The overall scheme can be viewed as model-free approximate PI that is based on approximation in both value and policy space . In view of the two-fold approximation needed to obtain ˜ Q µ ( i, u, r ), this scheme is more complex, but allows trajectory reuse and thus deals better with the exploration issue.

## 4.7.4 Implementation Issues of Parametric Policy Iteration

Approximate PI in its various forms has been the subject of extensive research, both theoretical and applied. Let us provide a few comments, focusing on the preceding parametric PI schemes.

## Architectural Issues and Cost Shaping

The choice of architectures for costs ˜ J µ ( i, r ) and Q-factors ˜ Q µ ( i, u, r ) is critical for the success of parametric approximation schemes. These architectures may involve the use of features, and they could be linear, or they could be nonlinear such as a neural network. A major advantage of a linear feature-based architecture is that the policy evaluations (4.47) and (4.49) involve linear least squares problems, which admit a closed-form solution. Moreover, when linear architectures are used, there is a broader variety of approximate policy evaluation methods with solid theoretical performance guarantees, such as TD( λ ), LSTD( λ ), and LSPE( λ ), which will be summarized in Section 4.9, and are described in detail in several textbook sources.

Another interesting possibility for architecture choice has to do with cost shaping , which we discussed in Section 4.2. This possibility involves a modified cost per stage

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[cf. Eq. (4.11)] for SSP problems, where V can be any approximation to J * . The corresponding formula for discounted problems is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As noted in Section 4.2, cost shaping may change significantly the suboptimal policies produced by approximate DP methods and approximate PI in particular. Generally, V should be chosen close (at least in terms of 'shape') to J * or to the current policy cost function J µ k , so that the difference J * -V or J µ k -V , respectively, can be approximated by an architecture that matches well the characteristics of the problem. It is possible to approximate either V or ˆ J with a parametric architecture or with a different approximation method, depending on the problem at hand. Moreover, in the context of approximate PI, the choice of V may change from one policy evaluation to the next.

The literature referenced at the end of the chapter provide some applications of cost shaping. An interesting possibility is to use complementary approximations for V and for J * or J µ k . For example V may be approximated by a neural network-based approach that aims to discover the general form of J * or J µ k , and then a different method may be applied to provide a local correction to V in order to refine the approximation. The next chapter will also illustrate this idea within the context of aggregation.

## Exploration Issues

Generating an appropriate set of training pairs ( i s , β s ) or triplets ( i s , u s , β s ) at the policy evaluation step of approximate PI poses considerable challenges, and the literature contains several related proposals. A generic

difficulty has to do with inadequate exploration , which we noted in Section 4.7.2.

In particular, when evaluating a policy µ with trajectory reuse, we will be generating many cost or Q-factor samples that start from states frequently visited by µ , but this may bias the simulation by underrepresenting states that are unlikely to occur under µ . As a result, the cost or Q-factor estimates of these underrepresented states may be highly inaccurate, causing potentially serious errors in the calculation of the improved policy µ via the policy improvement operation.

One possibility to improve the exploration of the state space is to use a large number of initial states to form a rich and representative subset, thereby limiting trajectory reuse. It may then be necessary to use relatively short trajectories to keep the cost of the simulation low. However, when using short trajectories it will be important to introduce a terminal cost function approximation in the policy evaluation step in order to make the cost sample β s more accurate, as noted earlier.

There have been other related approaches to improve exploration, particularly in connection with the temporal difference methods to be discussed in Section 4.9. In some of these approaches, trajectories are generated through a mix of two policies: the policy being evaluated, sometimes called the target policy , to distinguish from the other policy, used with some probability at each stage, which is called behavior policy and is introduced to enhance exploration; see the end-of-chapter references. Also, methods that use a behavior policy are called off-policy methods, while methods that do not are called on-policy methods. Note, however, that it may still be difficult to ensure that the mixed on-and-off policy will induce sufficient exploration. The area of efficient sampling, and the attendant issue of balancing exploration and the choice of promising controls (the socalled exploration-exploitation tradeoff) is a subject continuing research; for some recent work, see the paper by Russo and Van Roy [RuV16], and the monograph [RVK18].

## Oscillation Issues

Contrary to exact PI, which is guaranteed to yield an optimal policy, approximate PI produces a sequence of policies, which are only guaranteed to lie asymptotically within a certain error bound from the optimal; cf. Prop. 4.6.4. Moreover, the generated policies may oscillate. By this we mean that after a few iterations, policies tend to repeat in cycles.

This oscillation phenomenon, first described by the author in a 1996 conference [Ber96], occurs systematically in the absence of special conditions, for both optimistic and nonoptimistic PI methods. It can be observed even in very simple examples, and it is geometrically explained in the books [BeT96] (Section 6.4.2) and [Ber12] (Section 6.4.3).

Oscillations can in principle be particularly damaging, because there is no guarantee that the oscillating policies are 'good' policies, and there is often no way to verify how well they perform relative to the optimal. Section 6.4.2 of the book [BeT96] provides an argument suggesting that oscillations may not degrade significantly the approximate PI performance for many types of problems. Moreover, we note that oscillations can be avoided and approximate PI can be shown to converge under special conditions, which arise in particular when an aggregation approach is used; see Chapter 5 and the approximate policy iteration survey [Ber11a]. Also, when policies converge, there is a more favorable error bound, cf. Prop. 4.6.5.

## 4.8 Q -LEARNING

In this section we will discuss various Q-learning algorithms for discounted problems, which can be implemented in model-free fashion. The original method of this type is related to VI and can be used directly in the case of multiple policies. Instead of approximating the cost functions of successive policies as in the PI method, it updates the Q-factors associated with an optimal policy, thereby avoiding the multiple policy evaluation steps of PI. We will consider Q-learning as well as a variety of related methods with the shared characteristic that they involve exact or approximate Q-factors.

We first discuss the original form of Q-learning for discounted problems; the books [BeT96] and [Ber12] contain discussions of Q-learning for SSP problems. Then we discuss PI algorithms for Q-factors, including optimistic asynchronous versions, which lead to algorithms with reduced overhead per iteration. Finally we focus on Q-learning algorithms with Q-factor approximation.

## Q-Learning: A Stochastic VI Algorithm

In the discounted problem, the optimal Q-factors are defined for all pairs ( i, u ) with u ∈ U ( i ), by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As discussed in Section 4.3, these Q-factors satisfy for all ( i, u ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and are the unique solution of this set of equations. Moreover the optimal Q-factors can be obtained by the VI algorithm Q k +1 = FQ k , where F is

the operator defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is straightforward to show that F is a contraction with modulus α , similar to the DP operator T . Thus the algorithm Q k +1 = FQ k converges to Q * from every starting point Q 0 .

The original and most widely known Q-learning algorithm ([Wat89]) is a stochastic version of VI, whereby the expected value in Eq. (4.51) is suitably approximated by sampling and simulation. In particular, an infinitely long sequence of state-control pairs { ( i k , u k ) } is generated according to some probabilistic mechanism. For each pair ( i k , u k ), a state j k is generated according to the probabilities p i k j ( u k ). Then the Q-factor of ( i k , u k ) is updated using a stepsize γ k ∈ (0 , 1] while all other Q-factors are left unchanged:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash

Note that ( F k Q k )( i k , u k ) is a single sample approximation of the expected value defining ( FQ k )( i k , u k ) in Eq. (4.51).

To guarantee the convergence of the algorithm (4.52)-(4.53) to the optimal Q-factors, some conditions must be satisfied. Chief among these are that all state-control pairs ( i, u ) must be generated infinitely often within the infinitely long sequence { ( i k , u k ) } , and that the successor states j must be independently sampled at each occurrence of a given state-control pair. Furthermore, the stepsize γ k should satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which are typical of stochastic approximation methods (see e.g, the books [BeT96], [Ber12], Section 6.1.4), as for example when γ k = c 1 / ( k + c 2 ), where c 1 and c 2 are some positive constants. In addition some other technical conditions should hold. A mathematically rigorous convergence proof was given in the paper [Tsi94], which embeds Q-learning within a broad class of asynchronous stochastic approximation algorithms. This proof (also reproduced in [BeT96]) combines the theory of stochastic approximation algorithms with the convergence theory of asynchronous DP

and asynchronous iterative methods; cf. the paper [Ber82], and the books [BeT89] and [Ber16].

In practice, Q-learning has some drawbacks, the most important of which is that the number of Q-factors/state-control pairs ( i, u ) may be excessive. To alleviate this difficulty, we may introduce a Q-factor approximation architecture, which could be linear or nonlinear based for example on a neural network. One of these possibilities will be discussed next.

## Optimistic Policy Iteration Methods with Q-Factor Approximation - SARSA

We have discussed so far Q-learning algorithms with an exact representation of Q-factors. We will now consider Q-learning with linear featurebased Q-factor approximation. As we noted earlier, we may view Q-factors as optimal costs of a certain discounted DP problem, whose states are the state-control pairs ( i, u ) in addition to the original states; cf. Fig. 4.2.2. We may thus apply the approximate PI methods discussed earlier. For this, we need to introduce a linear parametric architecture ˜ Q ( i, u, r ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where φ ( i, u ) is a feature vector that depends on both state and control.

We have already discussed in Section 4.7.3 a model-free approximate PI method that is based on Q-factors and least squares training/regression. There are also optimistic approximate PI methods, which use a policy for a limited number of stages with cost function approximation for the remaining states, and/or a few samples in between policy updates. As an example, let us consider a Q-learning algorithm that uses a single sample between policy updates. At the start of iteration k , we have the current parameter vector r k , we are at some state i k , and we have chosen a control u k . Then:

- (1) We simulate the next transition ( i k , i k +1 ) using the transition probabilities p i k j ( u k ).
- (2) We generate the control u k +1 with the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[In some schemes, u k +1 is chosen with a small probability to be a different or random element of U ( i k +1 ) in order to enhance exploration.]

- (3) We update the parameter vector via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ k is a positive stepsize, and q k is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The vector φ ( i k , u k ) q k can be interpreted as an approximate gradient direction based on an underlying regression procedure, and q k is referred to as a temporal difference (cf. Section 4.9).

The process is now repeated with r k +1 , i k +1 , and u k +1 replacing r k , i k , and u k , respectively.

Extreme optimistic schemes of the type just described, including variants that involve nonlinear architectures, have been used in practice, and are often referred to as SARSA (State-Action-Reward-State-Action); see e.g., the books [BeT96], [BBD10], [SuB18]. When Q-factor approximation is used, their behavior is very complex, their theoretical convergence properties are unclear, and there are no associated performance bounds in the literature.

/negationslash

We finally note that in simulation-based PI methods for Q-factors, a major concern is the issue of exploration in the approximate evaluation step of the current policy µ , to ensure that state-control pairs ( i, u ) = ( i, µ ( i ) ) are generated sufficiently often in the simulation.

## 4.9 ADDITIONAL METHODS - TEMPORAL DIFFERENCES

In this section, we summarize a few additional methods for approximation in value space in infinite horizon problems. These include the simulationbased temporal difference methods for policy evaluation with a linear parametric architecture, whose primary aim is to address a bias-variance tradeoff similar to the one discussed in Section 4.7.2. Our presentation is brief, somewhat abstract, and makes use of linear algebra mathematics. It may be skipped without loss of continuity. This is only a summary; it is meant to provide a connection to other material in this chapter, and orientation for further reading into both the optimization and artificial intelligence literature on the subject.

## Approximate Policy Evaluation Using Projections

Our main concern in policy evaluation is to solve approximately the Bellman equation corresponding to a given policy µ . Thus, for discounted problems, we are interested in solving the linear system of equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T µ is the DP operator for µ , given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us consider the approximate solution of this equation by parametric approximation (cf. Section 4.7). This amounts to replacing J µ with some vector that lies within the manifold represented by the approximation architecture

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The approximate solution of systems of equations within an approximation manifold of the form (4.56) has a long history in scientific computation, particularly when the manifold is linear. A central approach involves the use of projections with respect to a weighted quadratic norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J ( i ) are the components of the vector J and ξ i are some positive weights. The projection of a vector J onto the manifold M is denoted by Π( J ). Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that for a nonlinear parametric architecture, such as a neural network, the projection may not exist and may not be unique. However, in the case of a linear architecture, where the approximation manifold M is a subspace, the projection does exist and is unique; this is a consequence of the fundamental orthogonal projection theorem of calculus and real analysis.

Let us consider three general approaches for approximation of J µ .

- (a) Project J µ onto M to obtain Π( J µ ), which is used as an approximation of J µ .
- (b) Start with some approximation ˆ J of J µ , perform N value iterations to obtain T µ N ˆ J , and project onto M to obtain Π( T µ N ˆ J ). We then use Π( T µ N ˆ J ) as an approximation to J µ .
- (c) Solve a projected version J µ = Π( T µ J µ ) of the Bellman Eq. (4.54), and use the solution of this projected equation as an approximation to J µ . We will also discuss related projected versions that involve other operators in place of T µ .

The preceding three approaches cannot be implemented exactly; for example, (a) is impossible since we do not know the values of J µ . However, it turns out that it is possible to implement these approaches by using a Monte Carlo simulation methodology that is suitable for large problems. To explain this methodology we first discuss the implementation of the projection operation through sampling for the case where the parametric architecture is linear and M is a subspace.

## Projection by Monte Carlo Simulation

We will focus on the case where the manifold M is a subspace of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where /Rfractur m denote the space of m -dimensional vectors, and Φ is an n × m matrix with rows denoted by φ ( i ) ′ , i = 1 , . . . , n . Here we use the notational convention that all vectors are column vectors, and prime denotes transposition, so φ ( i ) ′ is an m -dimensional row vector, and the subspace M may be viewed as the space spanned by the n -dimensional columns of Φ.

We consider projection with respect to the weighted Euclidean norm of Eq. (4.57), so Π( J ) is of the form Φ r ∗ , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By setting to 0 the gradient at r ∗ of the minimized expression above,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain the solution in closed form,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

assuming that the inverse above exists. The difficulty here is that when n is very large, the matrix-vector calculations in this formula can be very time-consuming.

On the other hand, assuming (by normalizing ξ if necessary) that ξ = ( ξ 1 , . . . , ξ n ) is a probability distribution, we may view the two terms in Eq. (4.61) as expected values with respect to ξ , and approximate them by Monte Carlo simulation. In particular, suppose that we generate a set of index samples i s , s = 1 , . . . , q , according to the distribution ξ , and form the Monte Carlo estimates

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β s is a 'noisy' sample of the exact value J ( i s )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the Monte Carlo estimates (4.62) to be asymptotically correct, we must have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is implied by a zero sample mean condition for the noise. †

Given the Monte Carlo approximation of the two terms in Eq. (4.61), we can estimate r ∗ with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(assuming sufficiently many samples are obtained to ensure the existence of the inverse above). ‡ This is also equivalent to estimating r ∗ by approximating the least squares minimization (4.60) with the following least squares training problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus simulation-based projection can be implemented in two equivalent ways:

† A suitable zero mean condition for the noise n ( i s ) has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where δ ( i s = i ) = 1 if i s = i and δ ( i s = i ) = 0 if i s = i . It states that the Monte Carlo averages of the noise terms corresponding to every state i are zero. Then the expression in Eq. (4.63) has the form

/negationslash

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and converges to 0 as q → ∞ , assuming that each index i is sampled infinitely often so that Eq. (4.64) can be used.

‡ The preceding derivation and the formula (4.65) actually make sense even if ξ = ( ξ 1 , . . . , ξ n ) has some zero components, as long as the inverses in Eqs. (4.61) and (4.65) exist. This is related to the concept of seminorm projection ; see [YuB12] for an approximate DP-related discussion.

- (a) Replacing expected values in the exact projection formula (4.61) by simulation-based estimates [cf. Eq. (4.65)].
- (b) Replacing the exact least squares problem (4.60) with a simulationbased least squares approximation [cf. Eq. (4.66)].

These dual possibilities of implementing projection by simulation can be used interchangeably. In particular, the least squares training problems considered in this book may be viewed as simulation-based approximate projection calculations .

Generally, we wish that the estimate r converges to r ∗ as the number of samples q increases. An important point is that it is not necessary that the simulation produces independent samples. Instead it is sufficient that the long term empirical frequencies by which the indices i appear in the simulation sequence are consistent with the probabilities ξ i of the projection norm, i.e., where δ ( i s = i ) = 1 if i s = i and δ ( i s = i ) = 0 if i s = i .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

/negationslash

Another important point is that the probabilities ξ i need not be predetermined. In fact, often the exact values of ξ i do not matter much, and one may wish to first specify a reasonable and convenient sampling scheme, and let ξ i be implicitly specified via Eq. (4.67) .

## Projected Equation View of Approximate Policy Evaluation

Let us now discuss the approximate policy evaluation method for costs of Section 4.7.2 [cf. Eq. (4.47)]. It can be interpreted in terms of a projected equation, written abstractly as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where: †

- (a) ˆ J is some initial guess of J µ (the terminal cost function approximation discussed in Section 4.7.2), and ˜ J µ is the vector

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the approximate policy evaluation of µ , used in the policy improvement operation (4.48). Here r is the solution of the training problem (4.47).

† The equation (4.68) assumes that all trajectories have equal length N , and thus does not allow trajectory reuse. If trajectories of different lengths are allowed, the term T N µ in the equation should be replaced by a more complicated weighted sum of powers of T µ ; see the paper [YuB12] for related ideas.

- (b) T µ is the DP operator corresponding to µ , which maps a vector J = J (1) , . . . , J ( n ) into the vector T µ J of Eq. (4.55).
- ( ) (c) T µ N denotes the N -fold application of the operator T µ , where N is the length of the sample trajectories used in the least squares regression problem (4.47). In particular, ( T µ N ˆ J )( i ) is the cost associated with starting at i , using µ for N stages, and incurring a terminal cost specified by the terminal cost function ˆ J . The sample state-cost pairs ( i s , β s ) are obtained from trajectories corresponding to this N -stage problem.
- (d) Π( T µ N ˆ J ) denotes projection of the vector T µ N ˆ J on the manifold of possible approximating vectors M with respect to a weighted norm, where each weight ξ i represents the relative frequency of the state i as initial state of a training trajectory. This projection is approximated by the least squares regression (4.47). In particular, the cost samples β s of the training set are noisy samples of the values ( T µ N ˆ J )( i s ), and the projection is approximated with a least squares minimization, to yield the function ˜ J µ of Eq. (4.68).

Suppose now that T µ N ˆ J is close to J µ (which happens if either N is large or ˆ J is close to J µ , or both) and the number of samples q is large (so that the simulation-based regression approximates well the projection operation Π). Then from Eq. (4.68), the approximate evaluation ˜ J µ of µ approaches the projection of J µ on the approximation manifold (4.56), which can be viewed as the best possible approximation of J µ (at least relative to the distance metric defined by the weighted projection norm). This provides an abstract formal rationale for the parametric PI method of Section 4.7.2, which is based on Eq. (4.68).

## TD( λ ), LSTD( λ ), and LSPE( λ )

Projected equations also fundamentally underlie temporal difference methods (TD for short), a prominent class of simulation-based methods for approximate evaluation of a policy. Examples of such methods are TD( λ ), LSTD( λ ), and LSPE( λ ), where λ is a scalar with 0 ≤ λ &lt; 1. †

These three methods require a linear parametric approximation architecture ˜ J µ = Φ r , and all aim at the same problem. This is the problem of solving a projected equation of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

† TD stands for 'temporal difference,' LSTD stands for 'least squares temporal difference,' and LSPE stands for 'least squares policy evaluation.'

where T µ is the operator (4.55), T ( λ ) µ J is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Π is projection on the approximation subspace

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with respect to some weighted projection norm. One interpretation of the equation J = T ( λ ) µ J is as a multistep version of Bellman's equation . It has the same solution, J µ , as the 'one-step' Bellman equation J = T µ J , which corresponds to λ = 0.

Of course the projected equation (4.69) cannot be solved exactly when the number of states n is large, since the projection is a high dimensional operation that requires computations of order n . Instead the key idea is to replace the projection by a simulation-based approximate projection , of the type discussed earlier. This yields the equation,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ Π is the approximate projection obtained by sampling.

For a more concrete description, let the i th row of the matrix Φ be the m -dimensional row vector φ ( i ) ′ , so that the cost J µ ( i ) is approximated as the inner product φ ( i ) ′ r :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose that we collect q samples of initial states i s , s = 1 , . . . , q , together with the corresponding transition costs g ( i s , i s +1 ), s = 1 , . . . , q . Then the parameter vector r that solves Eq. (4.70) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[cf. Eq. (4.66)], and defines the approximate evaluation Φ r of J µ . This relation can be expressed as a linear equation, which in principle can be solved in closed form [cf. Eq. (4.65)], and indeed LSTD( λ ) does exactly that. By contrast LSPE( λ ) and TD( λ ) solve this relation iteratively.

We will first give a high level description of the three methods, and then provide a more concrete description for the simpler case where λ = 0.

- (a) The LSTD( λ ) method, after the q samples have been collected, solves the relation (4.71) by matrix inversion, taking advantage of the fact

that this relation can be written as a linear equation. In particular, it can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C is some m × m square matrix, and d is an m -dimensional vector. The components of C and d are explicitly computed, and LSTD( λ ) produces the approximate cost function ˜ J µ ( i ) = Φ r where r = C -1 d is the solution of Eq. (4.72).

- (b) The LSPE( λ ) method solves the projected equation (4.69) by using a simulation-based projected value iteration ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here the projection is implemented iteratively, with sampling-based least squares regression, in a manner that resembles the incremental aggregated method of Section 3.1.3.

- (c) The TD( λ ) method is a simpler iterative stochastic approximation method for solving the linear equation (4.72). It can also be viewed as a stochastic gradient method, or as a stochastic version of the proximal algorithm for solving this linear equation (see the author's papers [Ber16c] and [Ber18d]).

An interesting question is how to select λ and what is its role. There is a bias-variance tradeoff here, similar to the one we discussed in Section 4.7.2. We will address this issue later in this section.

## TD(0), LSTD(0), and LSPE(0)

Let us describe in more detail LSTD(0) for evaluation of a given policy µ . We assume that the simulation generates a sample sequence of q transitions using µ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with corresponding transition costs

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, to simplify notation, we do not show the dependence of the transition costs on the control applied by µ . Let the i th row of the matrix Φ be the m -dimensional row vector φ ( i ) ′ , so that the cost J µ ( i ) is approximated as the inner product φ ( i ) ′ r :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since λ = 0, we have T ( λ ) = T , the samples of T µ Φ r in Eq. (4.71) are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the least squares problem in Eq. (4.71) has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By setting the gradient of the minimized expression to zero, we obtain the condition for r to attain the above minimum:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Solving this equation for r yields the LSTD(0) solution:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the inverse in the preceding equation must exist for the method to be well-defined; otherwise the iteration has to be modified. A modification may also be needed when the matrix inverted is nearly singular; in this case the simulation noise may introduce serious numerical problems. Various methods have been developed to deal with the near singularity issue; see Wang and Bertsekas [WaB13a], [WaB13b], and the DP textbook [Ber12], Section 7.3.

The expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that appears in the least squares sum minimization (4.74) and Eq. (4.75) is referred to as the temporal difference associated with the s th transition and parameter vector r . In the artificial intelligence literature, temporal differences are viewed as fundamental to learning and are accordingly interpreted, but we will not go further in this direction; see the RL textbooks that we have cited.

The LSPE(0) method is similarly derived. It consists of a simulationbased approximation of the projected value iteration method

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[cf. Eq. (4.73)]. At the k th iteration, it uses only the samples s = 1 , . . . , k , and updates the parameter vector according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where d s ( r s ) is the temporal difference of Eq. (4.77), evaluated at the iterate of iteration s ; the form of this iteration is derived similar to the case of LSTD(0). After q iterations, when all the samples have been processed, the vector r q obtained is the one used for the approximate evaluation of J µ . Note that the inverse in Eq. (4.78) can be updated economically from one iteration to the next, using fast linear algebra operations (cf. the discussion of the incremental Newton method in Section 3.1.3).

Overall, it can be shown that LSTD(0) and LSPE(0) [with efficient matrix inversion in Eq. (4.78)] require essentially identical amount of work to process the q samples associated with the current policy µ [this is also true for the LSTD( λ ) and LSPE( λ ) methods; see [Ber12], Section 6.3]. An advantage offered by LSPE(0) is that because it is iterative, it allows carrying over the final parameter vector r q , as a 'hot start' when passing from one policy evaluation to the next, in the context of an approximate PI scheme.

The TD(0) method has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ k is a diminishing stepsize parameter. It can be seen that TD(0) resembles an incremental gradient iteration for solving the least squares training problem (4.74), but with r replaced by the current iterate r k . The reason is that the gradient of the typical k th term in the least squares sum of Eq. (4.74) is the vector φ ( i k ) d k ( r k ) that appears in the TD(0) iteration (4.79) (cf. Section 3.1.3). Thus at each iteration, TD(0) uses only one sample, and changes r k in the opposite direction to the corresponding incremental gradient using a stepsize γ k that must be carefully controlled.

By contrast the LSPE(0) iteration (4.78) uses the full sum

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which may be viewed as an aggregated incremental method, with scaling provided by the matrix ( ∑ k s =1 φ ( i s ) φ ( i s ) ′ ) -1 . This explains why TD(0) is generally much slower and more fragile than LSPE(0). On the other hand TD(0) is simpler than both LSTD(0) and LSPE(0), and does not require a matrix inversion, which may be inconvenient when the column dimension m of Φ is large.

The properties, the analysis, and the implementation of TD methods in the context of approximate PI are quite complicated. In particular, the issue of exploration is important and must be addressed. Moreover there are convergence, oscillation, and reliability issues to contend with. LSTD( λ ) relies on matrix inversion and not on iteration, so it does not have a serious convergence issue, but the system (4.72) may be singular or near

singular, in which case very accurate simulation is needed to approximate C well enough for its inversion to be reliable; remedies for the case of a singular or near singular system are discussed in the papers [WaB13a], [WaB13b] (see also [Ber12], Section 7.3). LSPE( λ ) has a convergence issue because the mapping Π T ( λ ) µ may not be a contraction mapping (even though T µ is) and the projected value iteration (4.73) may not be convergent (it turns out that the mapping Π T ( λ ) µ is guaranteed to be a contraction for λ sufficiently close to 1).

## Direct and Indirect Policy Evaluation Methods

In trying to compare the approximate policy evaluation methods discussed in this section, we may draw a distinction between direct methods , which aim to compute approximately the projection Π( J µ ), and indirect methods , which try to solve the projected equation (4.69).

The method of Section 4.7.2 is direct and is based on Eq. (4.68). In particular, as N → ∞ and q → ∞ , it yields the approximate evaluation Π( J µ ). The TD methods are indirect, and aim at computing the solution of the projected equation (4.69). The solution of this equation is of the form Φ r ∗ λ , where the parameter vector r ∗ λ depends on λ . In particular the projected equation solution Φ r ∗ λ is different from Π( J µ ). It can be shown that it satisfies the error bound where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ‖ · ‖ ξ is a special projection norm of the form (4.57), where ξ is the steady-state probability distribution of the controlled system Markov chain under policy µ . Moreover as λ → 1 the projected equation solution Φ r ∗ λ approaches Π( J µ ). Based on this fact, methods which aim to compute Π( J µ ), such as the direct method of Section 4.7.2 are sometimes called TD(1). We refer to [Ber12], Section 6.3, for an account of this analysis, which is beyond the scope of this book.

The difference Π( J µ ) -Φ r ∗ λ is commonly referred to as the bias and is illustrated in Figure 4.9.1. As indicated in this figure and as the estimate (4.80) suggests, there is a bias-variance tradeoff . As λ is decreased, the solution of the projected equation (4.69) changes and more bias is introduced relative to the 'ideal' approximation Π J µ (this bias can be embarassingly large as shown by examples in the paper [Ber95]). At the same time, however, the simulation samples of T ( λ ) µ J contain less noise as λ is decreased. This provides another view of the bias-variance tradeoff, which we discussed in Section 4.7.2 in connection with the use of short trajectories.

Solution of projected equation

Ju

1 = 1

Subspace M = {@r|r € Rm}

1 = 0

- - -

-

Simulation error

Figure 4.9.1 Illustration of the bias-variance tradeoff in estimating the solution of the projected equation for different values of λ . As λ increases from λ = 0 towards λ = 1, the solution Φ r ∗ λ of the projected equation Φ r = Π T ( λ ) (Φ r ) approaches the projection Π J µ . The difference Φ r ∗ λ -Π J µ is the bias, and it decreases to 0 as λ approaches 1, while the simulation error variance increases.

<!-- image -->

## 4.10 EXACT AND APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING

Another method for exact solution of infinite horizon DP problems is based on linear programming ideas. In particular, J * can be shown to be the unique optimal solution of a certain linear program. Focusing on α -discounted problems, the key idea is that J * is the 'largest' (on a component-by-component basis) vector J that satisfies the constraint

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that J * (1) , . . . , J * ( n ) solve the linear program

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(see Fig. 4.10.1).

To verify this, let us use the VI algorithm to generate a sequence of vectors J k = ( J k (1) , . . . , J k ( n ) ) starting with an initial condition vector J 0 = ( J (1) , . . . , J ( n ) ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

J(2) 1

J (2) = g(2, u2) + apz1 (u2) J (1) + ap22 (u2) J (2)

J (2) = g (2, u') + ap21 (u) J (1) + ap22 (u-) J (2)

J* = (J*(1), J* (2))

J (1) = g (1, u2) + ap11 (u2) J(1) + ap12 (u2) J (2)

Figure 4.10.1 A linear program associated with a two-state SSP problem. The constraint set is shaded, and the objective to maximize is J (1) + J (2). Note that because we have J ( i ) ≤ J ∗ ( i ) for all i and vectors J in the constraint set, the vector J ∗ maximizes any linear cost function of the form ∑ n i =1 β i J ( i ) , where β i ≥ 0 for all i . If β i &gt; 0 for all i , then J ∗ is the unique optimal solution of the corresponding linear program.

<!-- image -->

This inequality can be used to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similarly

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since J k ( i ) converges to J * ( i ) as k →∞ , it follows that we will also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus out of all J satisfying the constraint (4.81), J * is the largest on a component-by-component basis.

Unfortunately, for large n the dimension of the linear program (4.82) can be very large and its solution can be impractical, particularly in the absence of special structure. In this case, we may consider finding an approximation to J * , which can be used in turn to obtain a (suboptimal) policy through approximation in value space.

One possibility is to approximate J * ( i ) with a linear feature-based architecture

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r = ( r 1 , . . . , r m ) is a vector of parameters, and for each state i , φ /lscript ( i ) are some features. It is then possible to determine r by using ˜ J ( i, r ) in place of J * in the preceding linear programming approach. In particular, we compute r as the solution of the program

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ I is either the state space I = { 1 , . . . , n } or a suitably chosen subset of I , and ˜ U ( i ) is either U ( i ) or a suitably chosen subset of U ( i ). This is a linear program because ˜ J ( i, r ) is assumed linear in the parameter vector r .

The major difficulty with this approximation approach is that while the dimension of r may be moderate, the number of constraints can be extremely large. It can be as large as nm , where n is the number of states and m is the maximum number of elements of the control constraint sets U ( i ). Thus for a large problem it is essential to reduce drastically the number of constraints. Random sampling methods may be used to select a suitable subset of the constraints to enforce (perhaps using some known suboptimal policies), and progressively enrich the subset as necessary. With such constraint sampling schemes, the linear programming approach may be practical even for problems with a very large number of states. Its application, however, may require considerable sophistication, and a substantial amount of computation (see de Farias and Van Roy [DFV03], [DFV04], [DeF04]).

We finally mention the possibility of using linear programming to evaluate approximately the cost function J µ of a stationary policy µ in the context of approximate PI. The motivation for this is that the linear program to evaluate a given policy involves fewer constraints.

## 4.11 APPROXIMATION IN POLICY SPACE

We will now consider briefly an alternative to approximation in value space: approximation within the space of policies. In particular, we parametrize stationary policies with a parameter vector r and denote them by ˜ µ ( r ), with components ˜ µ ( i, r ), i = 1 , . . . , n . The parametrization may be featurebased and/or may involve a neural network. The idea is then to optimize some measure of performance with respect to the parameter r .

Note that it is possible for a suboptimal control scheme to employ both types of approximation: in policy space and in value space, with a distinct architecture for each case (examples of such schemes have been discussed briefly in Sections 2.1.5 and 4.7.3). When neural networks are

Figure 4.11.1. Illustration of a simple supply chain system.

<!-- image -->

used, this is known as the simultaneous use of a 'policy network' (or 'actor network') and a 'value network' (or 'critic network'), each with its own set of parameters (see the following discussion on expert training).

Let us provide two examples where policy parametrizations are natural.

## Example 4.11.1: (Supply chain parametrization)

There are many problems where the general structure of an optimal or nearoptimal policy is known through analysis or insight into the problem's structure. An important case are supply chain systems involving production, inventory, and retail centers that are connected with transportation links. A simple example is illustrated in Fig. 4.11.1. Here a retail center places orders to the production center, depending on current stock. There may be orders in transit, and demand and delays can be stochastic. Such a problem can be formulated by DP but can be very difficult to solve exactly. However, intuitively, a near-optimal policy has a simple form: When the retail inventory goes below some critical level r 1 , order an amount to bring the inventory to a target level r 2 . Here a policy is specified by the parameter vector r = ( r 1 , r 2 ), and can be trained by one of the methods of this section. This type of approach readily extends to the case of a complex network of production/retail centers, multiple products, etc.

## Example 4.11.2: (Policy parametrization through cost parametrization)

In an important approach for parametrization of policies we start with a parametric cost function approximation ˜ J ( j, r ). We then define a parametrization in policy policy through the one-step lookahead minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ J is a function of a given form that depends on r . For example, ˜ J may be a linear feature-based architecture, with features possibly obtained through a separately trained neural network. The policies ˜ µ ( r ) thus defined form a class of one-step lookahead policies parametrized by r . We may then determine r through some form of policy training method.

Figure 4.11.2 The optimization framework for approximation in policy space. Here policies are parametrized with a parameter vector r and denoted by ˜ µ ( r ), with components ˜ µ ( i, r ), i = 1 , . . . , n . Each parameter value r determines a policy µ ( r ), and a cost J ˜ µ ( r ) ( i 0 ) for each initial state i 0 , as indicated in the figure. The optimization approach determines r through the minimization

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the expected value above is taken with respect to a suitable probability distribution of i 0 .

In what follows we will discuss briefly two training approaches for approximation in policy space.

## 4.11.1 Training by Cost Optimization - Policy Gradient and Random Search Methods

According to the first approach, we parametrize the policies by the parameter vector r , and we optimize the corresponding expected cost over r . In particular, we determine r through the minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J ˜ µ ( r ) ( i 0 ) is the cost of the policy ˜ µ ( r ) starting from the initial state i 0 , and the expected value above is taken with respect to a suitable probability distribution of the initial state i 0 (cf. Fig. 4.11.2). In the case where the initial state i 0 is known and fixed, the method involves just minimization of J ˜ µ ( r ) ( i 0 ) over r , This simplifies a great deal the minimization, particularly when the problem is deterministic.

## Gradient Methods for Cost Optimization

Let us first consider methods that perform the minimization (4.83) by using a gradient method, and for simplicity let us assume that the initial

condition i 0 is known. Thus the problem is to minimize J ˜ µ ( r ) ( i 0 ) over r by using the gradient method

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

assuming that J ˜ µ ( r ) ( i 0 ) is differentiable with respect to r . Here γ k is a positive stepsize parameter, and ∇ ( · ) denotes gradient with respect to r evaluated at the current iterate r k .

The difficulty with this method is that the gradient ∇ J ˜ µ ( r k ) ( i 0 ) may not be explicitly available. In this case, the gradient must be approximated by finite differences of cost function values J ˜ µ ( r k ) ( i 0 ). Unfortunately, in the case of a stochastic problem, the cost function values may be computable only through Monte Carlo simulation. This may introduce a large amount of noise, so it is likely that many samples will need to be averaged in order to obtain sufficiently accurate gradients, thereby making the method inefficient. On the other hand, when the problem is deterministic, this difficulty does not appear, and the use of the gradient method (4.84) or other methods that do not rely on the use of gradients (such as coordinate descent) is facilitated.

There is extensive literature on alternative and more efficient policy gradient methods for stochastic problems, which are based on gradient approximations through sampling. A popular type of method is based on the use of randomized policies [i.e., policies that map a state i to a probability distribution over the set of controls U ( i ), rather than mapping onto a single control]. † The method also uses a convenient gradient formula that involves the natural logarithm of the sampling distribution, and is known as the log-likelihood trick . We will next provide an outline of the ideas underlying this method.

## Policy Gradient Methods for Randomized Policies

The detailed description and analysis of randomized policies and the associated policy gradient methods are beyond our scope. To get a sense of the general principle underlying this gradient-based approach, let us digress from the DP context of this chapter, and consider the generic optimization problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

† The AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs (Silver et al. [SHM16], [SHS17]) also use randomized policies, and a policy adjustment scheme that involves incremental changes along 'directions of improvement.' However, these changes are implemented through the MCTS algorithm used by these programs, without the explicit use of a gradient (see the discussion in Section 2.4.2). Thus it may be said that the AlphaGo and AlphaZero programs involve a form of approximation in policy space (as well as approximation in value space), which bears resemblance but cannot be classified as a policy gradient method.

where Z is a subset of the m -dimensional space /Rfractur m , and F is some realvalued function over /Rfractur m .

We will take the unusual step of converting this problem to the stochastic optimization problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where z is viewed as a random variable, P Z is the set of probability distributions over Z , p denotes the generic distribution in P Z , and E p {·} denotes expected value with respect to p . Of course this enlarges the search space from Z to P Z , but it allows the use of randomization schemes and simulation-based methods, even if the original problem is deterministic.

In a stochastic DP context, such as the SSP and discounted problems that we focused on in this chapter, the cost function is already stochastic, but to obtain a problem of the form (4.85), we must enlarge the set of policies to include randomized policies , mapping a state i into a probability distribution over the set of controls U ( i ).

Suppose now that we restrict attention to a subset ˜ P Z ⊂ P Z of probability distributions p ( z ; r ) that are parametrized by some continuous parameter r , e.g., a vector in some m -dimensional space. In other words, we approximate the stochastic optimization problem (4.85) with the restricted problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we may use a gradient method for solving this problem, such as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∇ ( · ) denotes gradient with respect to r of the function in parentheses, evaluated at the current iterate r k .

A key fact here is that there is a useful formula for the gradient in Eq. (4.86), which involves the gradient with respect to r of the natural logarithm log ( p ( z ; r k ) ) . Indeed, assuming for notational convenience that p ( z ; r k ) is a discrete distribution, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and finally

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The preceding formula suggests an incremental implementation of the gradient iteration (4.86) that approximates the expected value in the right side above with a single sample. This is in the spirit of the incremental/stochastic gradient training methods that we have discussed in Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2.1. The typical iteration of this method is as follows.

## Sample-Based Gradient Method for Parametric Approximation of min z ∈ Z F ( z )

Let r k be the current parameter vector.

- (a) Obtain a sample z k according to the distribution p ( z ; r k ).
- (b) Compute the gradient ∇ ( log ( p ( z k ; r k ) ) ) . (c) Iterate according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The advantage of the preceding sample-based method is its simplicity and generality. It allows the use of parametric approximation for any minimization problem, as long as the logarithm of the sampling distribution p ( z ; r ) can be differentiated with respect to r , and samples of z can be obtained using the distribution p ( z ; r ).

Another major advantage is that the iteration (4.87) requires the sample cost values F ( z k ) but not the gradient of F . As a result the iteration has a model-free character : we don't need to know the form of the function F as long as we have a simulator that produces the cost function value F ( z ) for any given z . There are, however, some challenging issues to consider.

The first of these is that the problem solved is a randomized version of the original. If the gradient iteration (4.87) produces a parameter r in the limit and the distribution p ( z ; r ) is not atomic (i.e., it is not concentrated a single point), then a solution z ∈ Z must be extracted from p ( z ; r ). In the SSP and discounted problems of this chapter, the subset ˜ P Z of parametric distributions typically contains the atomic distributions, while it can be shown that minimization over the set of all distributions P Z produces the same optimal value as minimization over Z (the use of randomized policies does not improve the optimal cost of the problem), so this difficulty does not arise.

Another issue is how to design the approximation architecture and how to collect the samples z k . Different methods must strike a balance of convenient implementation, and a reasonable guarantee that the search space Z is sufficiently well explored.

Finally, we must deal with the issue of efficient computation of the sampled gradient

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the context of DP, including the SSP and discounted problems that we have been dealing with, there are some specialized procedures and corresponding parametrizations to approximate this gradient conveniently. The following is an example.

## Example 4.11.3 (Policy Gradient Method - Discounted Cost)

Consider the α -discounted problem and denote by z the infinite horizon statecontrol trajectory:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We consider a parametrization of randomized policies with parameter r , so the control at state i is generated according to a distribution p ( u | i ; r ) over U ( i ). Then for a given r , the state-control trajectory z is a random vector with probability distribution denoted p ( z ; r ). The cost corresponding to the trajectory z is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the problem is to minimize over r .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To apply the sample-based gradient method (4.87), given the current iterate r k , we must generate the sample state-control trajectory z k , according to the distribution p ( z ; r k ), compute the corresponding cost F ( z k ), and also calculate the gradient

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us assume a model-based context where the transition probabilities p ij ( u ) are known, and let us also assume that the logarithm of the randomized policy distribution p ( u | i ; r ) is differentiable with respect to r . Then the logarithm that is differentiated in Eq. (4.88) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and its gradient (4.88), which is needed in the iteration (4.87), is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the policy gradient method (4.87) is very simple to implement: for the given parameter vector r k , we generate a sample trajectory z k using the corresponding randomized policy p ( u | i ; r k ), we calculate the corresponding sample cost F ( z k ), and the gradient (4.88) using the expression (4.89), and we update r k using Eq. (4.87).

Policy gradient methods for other types of DP problems can be similarly developed, including for model-free contexts. A further discussion is beyond our scope, and we refer to the end-of-chapter literature for a variety of specific methods.

The main drawback of policy gradient methods is potential unreliability due to the stochastic uncertainty corrupting the calculation of the gradients, the slow convergence that is typical of gradient methods in many settings, and the presence of local minima. For this reason, methods based on random search have been considered as potentially more reliable alternatives to policy gradient methods. Viewed from a high level, random search methods are similar to policy gradient methods in that they aim at iterative cost improvement through sampling. However, they need not involve randomized policies, they are not subject to cost differentiability restrictions, and they offer some global convergence guarantees, so in principle they are not affected much by local minima.

## Random Search and Cross-Entropy Methods

Random search methods explore the space of the parameter vector r in some randomized but intelligent fashion. There are several types of random search methods for general optimization, and some of them have been suggested for approximate DP. We will briefly describe the cross-entropy method , which has gained considerable attention.

The method bears resemblance to policy gradient methods, in that it generates a parameter sequence { r k } by changing r k to r k +1 along a direction of 'improvement.' This direction is obtained by using the policy ˜ µ ( r k ) to generate randomly cost samples corresponding to a set of sample parameter values that are concentrated around r k . The current set of sample parameters are then screened: some are accepted and the rest are rejected, based on a cost improvement criterion. Then r k +1 is determined as a 'central point' or as the 'sample mean' in the set of accepted sample parameters, some more samples are generated randomly around r k +1 , and the process is repeated; see Fig. 4.11.3. Thus successive iterates r k are 'central points' of successively better groups of samples, so in some broad

Figure 4.11.3 Schematic illustration of the cross entropy method. At the current iterate r k , we construct an ellipsoid E k centered at r k . We generate a number of random samples within E k , and we 'accept' a subset of the samples that have 'low' cost. We then choose r k +1 to be the sample mean of the accepted samples, and construct a sample 'covariance' matrix of the accepted samples. We then form the new ellipsoid E k +1 using this matrix and a suitable radius parameter, and continue. Notice the resemblance with a policy gradient method: we move from r k to r k +1 in a direction of cost improvement.

<!-- image -->

sense, the random sample generation process is guided by cost improvement. This idea is shared with evolutionary programming; see e.g., the books [Bac96], [DeJ06], and the paper by Salimans et al. [SHC17], which provides references to many other works.

The cross-entropy method is very simple to implement, does not suffer from the fragility of gradient-based optimization, does not involve randomized policies, and relies on some supportive theory; we refer to the literature for details. Like all random search methods, its convergence rate guarantees are limited, and its success depends on domain-specific insight and the skilled use of heuristics. However, the method is well-suited for the use of parallel computation, and has gained a favorable reputation through some impressive successes. In particular, it was used for learning a high-scoring strategy in the game of tetris; see Szita and Lorinz [SzL06], and Thiery and Scherrer [ThS09]. There have also been reports of domain-specific successes with related random search methods; see Salimans et al. [SHC17].

## 4.11.2 Expert Supervised Training

According to the second approximation in policy space approach, we choose the parameter r by 'training' on a large number of sample state-control pairs ( i s , u s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , such that for each s , u s is a 'good' control at state i s . This can be done for example by solving the least squares problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(possibly with added regularization). In particular, we may determine u s by a human or a software 'expert' that can choose 'near-optimal' controls at given states, so ˜ µ is trained to match the behavior of the expert. We have also discussed this approach in Section 2.1.3, in the context of finite horizon problems. In the context of artificial intelligence, it comes within the framework of supervised learning methods. †

Another possibility is to suitably select a large number of sample states i s , s = 1 , . . . , q, and generate the controls u s , s = 1 , . . . , q, through a one-step lookahead minimization of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ J is a suitable one-step lookahead function (multistep lookahead can also be used). Similarly, once a parametric Q -factor approximation architecture ˜ Q ( i, u, r ) is chosen, we can select a large number of sample states i s , s = 1 , . . . , q, and then compute the controls u s , s = 1 , . . . , q, through the one-step lookahead minimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, we will be collecting sample state-control pairs ( i s , u s ), s = 1 , . . . , q , using approximation in value space through Eq. (4.91) or Eq. (4.92), and then applying approximation in policy space through Eq. (4.90).

Of course in the expert training approach we cannot expect to obtain a policy that performs better than the expert with which it is trained, in the case of Eq. (4.90), or the one-step lookahead policy that is based on the approximation ˜ J or ˜ Q , in the case of Eq. (4.91) or Eq. (4.92), respectively. However, a major advantage is that once the parametrized policy is obtained, the on-line implementation of the policy is fast and does not involve extensive calculations such as minimizations of the form (4.91). This advantage is generally shared by schemes that are based on approximation in policy space.

† Tesauro [Tes89a], [Tes89b] constructed a backgammon player, trained by a neural network and a supervised learning approach (called 'comparison learning'), which used examples from human expert play (he was the expert who provided the training samples). However, his subsequent TD-based algorithm [Tes92], [Tes94], [Tes95], performed substantially better, and his rollout-based algorithm [TeG96] performed even better. The Deepchess program by David, Netanyahu, and Wolf [DNW16] provides another example of an expert supervised training approach.

## 4.12 NOTES AND SOURCES

In this chapter we have provided an introduction to infinite horizon DP with a view towards approximate solution methods that are suitable for largescale problems. We have restricted ourselves to finite-state problems with perfect state information. Infinite-state problems as well as partial state information and average cost problems exhibit more complex behaviors and present many challenges for approximate DP methods. The theory of these problems is developed in several books, including the author's [Ber12] and [Ber18a]. The latter book contains much recent advanced research on infinite-state deterministic and stochastic shortest path problems. The book by Puterman [Put94] contains a detailed account of discounted and average cost finite-state Markovian decision problems.

The methods of VI and PI, and their optimistic variants are the cornerstones of infinite horizon DP, and they serve as the principal points of departure for approximations. In addition to the computational topics covered in this chapter, we should mention that both VI and PI can be implemented via distributed asynchronous computation; see the author's papers on DP and fixed point computations [Ber82], [Ber83], the paper by Williams and Baird on asynchronous PI [WiB93], and the series of papers by Bertsekas and Yu [BeY10], [BeY12], [YuB13a] on asynchronous optimistic PI and Q-learning. Generally, asynchronous and distributed algorithms are natural in computational contexts involving simulation, which by its nature is well suited to both multiprocessing and asynchronous implementation.

The variational form of Bellman's equation (Section 4.2) has been used in various contexts, involving error bounds for value iteration, since the early days of DP theory, see e.g., [Ber12], Section 2.1.1. The variational form of Bellman's equation is also implicit in the adaptive aggregation framework of Bertsekas and Castanon [BeC89]. In the context of RL, the variational equation has been used in various algorithmic contexts under the name reward shaping or potential-based shaping (we have used the term 'cost shaping' here as we are focusing on cost minimization); see e.g., the papers by Ng, Harada, and Russell [NHR99], Wiewiora [Wie03], Asmuth, Littman, and Zinkov [ALZ08], Devlin and Kudenko [DeK11], Grzes [Grz17] for some representative works. While reward shaping does not change the optimal policies of the original DP problem, it may change significantly the suboptimal policies produced by approximate DP methods that use linear feature-based approximation. Basically, with reward shaping and a linear approximation architecture, V is used as an extra feature . This is closely related with the idea of using approximate cost functions of policies as basis functions in approximation architectures; see the discussion in the neuro-dynamic programming book [BeT96], Section 3.1.4.

Fitted VI algorithms have been used for finite horizon problems since the early days of DP. They are conceptually simple and easily imple-

mentable, and they are in wide use for approximation of either optimal costs or Q-factors (see e.g., Gordon [Gor95], Longstaff and Schwartz [LoS01], Ormoneit and Sen [OrS02], Ernst, Geurts, and Wehenkel [EGW06], Antos, Munos, and Szepesvari [AMS07], and Munos and Szepesvari [MuS08]).

The performance bound of Props. 4.6.1 and 4.6.3 for multistep lookahead, rollout, and terminal cost function approximation are sharper versions of earlier results for one step lookahead, terminal cost function approximation, but no rollout; see Prop. 6.1.1 in the author's DP textbook [Ber17] (and earlier editions), as well as [Ber18a], Section 2.2. The approximate PI method of Section 4.7.3 has been proposed by Fern, Yoon, and Givan [FYG06], and variants have also been discussed and analyzed by several other authors. The method (with some variations) has been used to train a tetris playing computer program that performs impressively better than programs that are based on other variants of approximate policy iteration, and various other methods; see Scherrer [Sch13], Scherrer et al. [SGG15], and Gabillon, Ghavamzadeh, and Scherrer [GGS13], who also provide an analysis of the method.

Q-learning (Section 4.8) was first proposed by Watkins [Wat89], and had a major impact in the development of the field. A rigorous convergence proof of Q-learning was given by Tsitsiklis [Tsi94], in a more general framework that combined several ideas from stochastic approximation theory and the theory of distributed asynchronous computation. This proof covered discounted problems, and SSP problems where all policies are proper. It also covered SSP problems with improper policies, assuming that the Qlearning iterates are either nonnegative or bounded. Convergence without the nonnegativity or the boundedness assumption was shown by Yu and Bertsekas [YuB13b]. Optimistic asynchronous versions of PI based on Qlearning, which have solid convergence properties, are given by Bertsekas and Yu [BeY10], [BeY12], [YuB13a]. The distinctive feature of these methods is that the policy evaluation process aims towards the solution of an optimal stopping problem rather than towards to solution of the linear system of Bellman equations associated with the policy; this is needed for the convergence proof, to avoid the pathological behavior first identified by Williams and Baird [WiB93], and noted earlier.

The advantage updating idea, which was noted in the context of finite horizon problems in Section 3.3, can be readily extended to infinite horizon problems. In this context, it was proposed by Baird [Bai93], [Bai94]; see [BeT96], Section 6.6. A related variant of approximate policy iteration and Q -learning, called differential training , has been proposed by the author in [Ber97b] (see also Weaver and Baxter [WeB99]).

Projected equations (Section 4.9) underlie Galerkin methods, which have a long history in scientific computation. They are widely used for many types of problems, including the approximate solution of large linear systems arising from discretization of partial differential and integral equations. The connection of approximate policy evaluation based on projected