Journal of Machine Learning Research 5 (2003) 1-25
Submitted 4/02; Revised 9/02; Published 12/03
Learning Rates for Q-learning
Eyal Even-Dar
EVEND@CS.TAU.AC.IL
Yishay Mansour
MANSOUR@CS.TAU.AC.IL
School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel
Editor: Peter Bartlett
Abstract
In this paper we derive convergence rates for Q-learning. We show an interesting relationship
between the convergence rate and the learning rate used in Q-learning. For a polynomial learning
rate, one which is 1/tω at time t where ω ∈(1/2,1), we show that the convergence rate is poly-
nomial in 1/(1 −γ), where γ is the discount factor. In contrast we show that for a linear learning
rate, one which is 1/t at time t, the convergence rate has an exponential dependence on 1/(1−γ).
In addition we show a simple example that proves this exponential behavior is inherent for linear
learning rates.
Keywords:
Reinforcement Learning, Q-Learning, Stochastic Processes, Convergence Bounds,
Learning Rates.
1. Introduction
In Reinforcement Learning, an agent wanders in an unknown environment and tries to maximize its
long term return by performing actions and receiving rewards. The challenge is to understand how
a current action will affect future rewards. A good way to model this task is with Markov Decision
Processes (MDP), which have become the dominant approach in Reinforcement Learning (Sutton
and Barto, 1998, Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996).
An MDP includes states (which abstract the environment), actions (which are the available
actions to the agent), and for each state-action pair, a distribution of next states (the states reached
after performing the action in the given state). In addition there is a reward function that assigns
a stochastic reward for each state and action. The return combines a sequence of rewards into a
single value that the agent tries to optimize. A discounted return has a parameter γ ∈(0,1) where
the reward received at step k is discounted by γk.
One of the challenges of Reinforcement Learning is when the MDP is not known, and we can
only observe the trajectory of states, actions and rewards generated by the agent wandering in the
MDP. There are two basic conceptual approaches to the learning problem. The ﬁrst is model based,
where we ﬁrst reconstruct a model of the MDP, and then ﬁnd an optimal policy for the approximate
model. The second approach is implicit methods that update the information after each step, and
based on this derive an estimate to the optimal policy. The most popular of those methods is Q-
learning (Watkins, 1989).
Q-learning is an off-policy method that can be run on top of any strategy wandering in the
MDP. It uses the information observed to approximate the optimal function, from which one can
c⃝2003 Eyal Even-Dar and Yishay Mansour.


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
construct the optimal policy. There are various proofs that Q-learning does converge to the optimal
Q function, under very mild conditions (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996, Tsitsiklis, 1994, Watkins
and Dyan, 1992, Littman and Szepesv´ari, 1996, Jaakkola et al., 1994, Borkar and Meyn, 2000).
The conditions have to do with the exploration policy and the learning rate. For the exploration
one needs to require that each state action be performed inﬁnitely often. The learning rate controls
how fast we modify our estimates. One expects to start with a high learning rate, which allows fast
changes, and lowers the learning rate as time progresses. The basic conditions are that the sum of the
learning rates goes to inﬁnity (so that any value could be reached) and that the sum of the squares of
the learning rates is ﬁnite (which is required to show that the convergence is with probability one).
We build on the proof technique of Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996), which is based on conver-
gence of stochastic iterative algorithms, to derive convergence rates for Q-learning. We study two
models of updating in Q-learning. The ﬁrst is the synchronous model, where all state action pairs
are updated simultaneously. The second is the asynchronous model, where at each step we update
a single state action pair. We distinguish between two sets of learning rates. The most interesting
outcome of our investigation is the relationship between the form of the learning rates and the rate
of convergence. A linear learning rate is of the form 1/t at time t, and a polynomial learning rate,
which is of the form 1/tω, where ω ∈(1/2,1) is a parameter.
We show for synchronous models that for a polynomial learning rate the convergence rate is
polynomial in 1/(1 −γ), while for a linear learning rate the convergence rate is exponential in
1/(1 −γ). We also describe an MDP that has exponential behavior for a linear learning rate. The
lower bound simply shows that if the initial value is one and all the rewards are zero, it takes
O((1/ε)1/(1−γ)) updates, using a linear learning rate, until we reach a value of ε.
The different behavior might be explained by the asymptotic behavior of ∑t αt, one of the condi-
tions that ensure that Q-learning converges from any initial value. In the case of a linear learning rate
we have that ∑T
t=1 αt = O(ln(T)), whereas using polynomial learning rate it behaves as O(T 1−ω).
Therefore, using polynomial learning rate each value can be reached by polynomial number of steps
and using linear learning rate each value requires exponential number of steps.
The convergence rate of Q-learning in a batch setting, where many samples are averaged for
each update, was analyzed by Kearns and Singh (1999). A batch setting does not have a learning
rate and has much of the ﬂavor of model based techniques, since each update is an average of many
samples. A run of a batch Q-learning is divided into phases, at the end of each phase an update is
made. The update after each phase is reliable since it averages many samples.
The convergence of Q-learning with linear learning rate was studied by Szepesvari (1998) for
special MDPs, where the next state distribution is the same for each state. (This setting is much
closer to the PAC model, since there is no inﬂuence between the action performed and the states
reached, and the states are i.i.d distributed). For this model Szepesvari (1998) shows a convergence
rate, which is exponential in 1/(1 −γ). Beleznay et al. (1999) give an exponential lower bound in
the number of the states for undiscounted return.
2. The Model
We deﬁne a Markov Decision process (MDP) as follows
Deﬁnition 1 A Markov Decision process (MDP) M is a 4-tuple (S,U,P,R), where S is a set of the
states, U is a set of actions (U(i) is the set of actions available at state i), PM
i,j(a) is the transition
2


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
probability from state i to state j when performing action a ∈U(i) in state i, and RM(s,a) is the
reward received when performing action a in state s.
We assume that RM(s,a) is non-negative and bounded by Rmax, i.e., ∀s,a : 0 ≤RM(s,a) ≤Rmax.
For simplicity we assume that the reward RM(s,a) is deterministic, however all our results apply
when RM(s,a) is stochastic.
A strategy for an MDP assigns, at each time t, for each state s a probability for performing action
a ∈U(s), given a history Ft−1 = {s1,a1,r1,...,st−1,at−1,rt−1} which includes the states, actions and
rewards observed until time t −1. A policy is memory-less strategy, i.e., it depends only on the
current state and not on the history. A deterministic policy assigns each state a unique action.
While following a policy π we perform at time t action at at state st and observe a reward rt
(distributed according to RM(s,a)), and the next state st+1 (distributed according to PM
st,st+1(at)). We
combine the sequence of rewards to a single value called the return, and our goal is to maximize
the return. In this work we focus on discounted return, which has a parameter γ ∈(0,1), and the
discounted return of policy π is V π
M = ∑∞
t=0 γtrt, where rt is the reward observed at time t. Since all
the rewards are bounded by Rmax the discounted return is bounded by Vmax = Rmax
1−γ .
We deﬁne a value function for each state s, under policy π, as V π
M(s) = E[∑∞
i=0 riγi], where the
expectation is over a run of policy π starting at state s. We deﬁne a state-action value function
Qπ
M(s,a) = RM(s,a) + γ∑¯s PM
s,¯s(a)V π
M(¯s) , whose value is the return of initially performing action a
at state s and then following policy π. Since γ < 1 we can deﬁne another parameter β = (1−γ)/2,
which will be useful for stating our results. (Note that as β decreases Vmax increases.)
Let π∗be an optimal policy, which maximizes the return from any start state. (It is well known
that there exists an optimal strategy, which is a deterministic policy (Puterman., 1994).) This im-
plies that for any policy π and any state s we have V π∗
M (s) ≥V π
M(s), and π∗(s) = argmaxa(RM(s,a)+
γ(∑s′ PM
s,s′(a)maxb Q(s′,b)). The optimal policy is also the only ﬁxed point of the operator, (TQ)(s,a) =
RM(s,a)+γ∑s′ Ps,s′(a)maxb Q(s′,b). We use V ∗
M and Q∗
M for V π∗
M and Qπ∗
M , respectively. We say that
a policy π is an ε-approximation of the optimal policy if ∥V ∗
M −V π
M∥∞≤ε.
For a sequence of state-action pairs let the covering time, denoted by L, be an upper bound on
the number of state-action pairs starting from any pair, until all state-action appear in the sequence.
Note that the covering time can be a function of both the MDP and the sequence or just of the
sequence. Initially we assume that from any start state, within L steps all state-action pairs appear
in the sequence. Later, we relax the assumption and assume that with probability at least 1
2, from
any start state in L steps all state-action appear in the sequence. In this paper, the underlying policy
generates the sequence of state action pairs.
The Parallel Sampling Model, PS(M), as was introduced by Kearns and Singh (1999). The
PS(M) is an ideal exploration policy. A single call to PS(M) returns for every pair (s,a) the next
state s′, distributed according to PM
s,s′(a) and a reward r distributed according to RM(s,a). The
advantage of this model is that it allows to ignore the exploration and to focus on the learning. In
some sense PS(M) can be viewed as a perfect exploration policy.
Notations: The notation g = ˜Ω(f) implies that there are constants c1 and c2 such that g ≥
c1 f lnc2(f). All the norms ∥· ∥, unless otherwise speciﬁed, are L∞norms, i.e., ∥(x1,...,xn)∥=
maxi xi.
3


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
3. Q-learning
The Q-learning algorithm (Watkins, 1989) estimates the state-action value function (for discounted
return) as follows:
Qt+1(s,a) = (1−αt(s,a))Qt(s,a)+αt(s,a)(RM(s,a)+γ max
b∈U(s′)Qt(s′,b)),
(1)
where s′ is the state reached from state s when performing action a at time t. Let T s,a be the
set of times, where action a was performed at state s, then αt(s,a) = 0 for t /∈T s,a. It is known
that Q-learning converges to Q∗if each state action pair is performed inﬁnitely often and αt(s,a)
satisﬁes for each (s,a) pair: ∑∞
t=1 αt(s,a) = ∞and ∑∞
t=1 α2
t (s,a) < ∞(Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996,
Tsitsiklis, 1994, Watkins and Dyan, 1992, Littman and Szepesv´ari, 1996, Jaakkola et al., 1994).
Q-learning is an asynchronous process in the sense that it updates a single entry each step.
Next we describe two variants of Q-learning, which are used in the proofs. The ﬁrst algorithm is
synchronous Q-learning, which performs the updates by using the PS(M). Speciﬁcally:
∀s,a
:
Q0(s,a) = C
∀s,a
:
Qt+1(s,a) = (1−αω
t )Qt(s,a)+αω
t (RM(s,a)+γ max
b∈U(¯s)Qt(¯s,b)),
where ¯s is the state reached from state s when performing action a and C is some constant. The
learning rate is αω
t =
1
(t+1)ω , for ω ∈(1/2,1]. We distinguish between a linear learning rate, which
is ω = 1, and a polynomial learning rate, which is ω ∈(1
2,1).
The asynchronous Q-learning algorithm, is simply regular Q-learning as deﬁne in (1), and we
add the assumption that the underlying strategy has a covering time of L. The updates are as follows:
∀s,a
:
Q0(s,a) = C
∀s,a
:
Qt+1(s,a) = (1−αω
t (s,a))Qt(s,a)+αω
t (s,a)(RM(s,a)+γ max
b∈U(¯s)Qt(¯s,b))
where ¯s is the state reached from state s when performing action a and C is some constant. Let
#(s,a,t) be one plus the number of times, until time t, that we visited state s and performed action
a. The learning rate αω
t (s,a) =
1
[#(s,a,t)]ω , if t ∈T s,a and αω
t (s,a) = 0 otherwise. Again, ω = 1 is a
linear learning rate, and ω ∈(1
2,1) is a polynomial learning rate.
4. Our Main Results
Our main results are upper bounds on the convergence rates of Q-learning algorithms and showing
their dependence on the learning rate. The basic case is the synchronous Q-learning. We show that
for a polynomial learning rate we have a complexity, which is polynomial in 1/(1−γ) = 1/(2β). In
contrast, we show that linear learning rate has an exponential dependence on 1/β. Our results exhibit
a sharp difference between the two learning rates, although they both converge with probability one.
This distinction, which is highly important, can be observed only when we study the convergence
rate, rather than convergence in the limit.
The bounds for asynchronous Q-learning are similar. The main difference is the introduction of
a covering time L. For polynomial learning rate we derive a bound polynomial in 1/β, and for linear
learning rate our bound is exponential in 1
β. We also show a lower bound for linear learning rate,
4


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
which is exponential in 1
β. This implies that our upper bounds are tight, and that the gap between
the two bounds is real.
We ﬁrst prove the results for the synchronous Q-learning algorithm, where we update all the
entries of the Q function at each time step, i.e., the updates are synchronous. The following theorem
derives the bound for polynomial learning rate.
Theorem 2 Let QT be the value of the synchronous Q-learning algorithm using polynomial learn-
ing rate at time T. Then with probability at least 1−δ, we have that ||QT −Q∗|| ≤ε, given that
T = Ω




V 2
max ln(|S| |A|Vmax
δβε
)
β2ε2


1
ω
+
1
β ln Vmax
ε

1
1−ω



The above bound is somewhat complicated. To simplify, assume that ω is a constant and con-
sider ﬁrst only its dependence on ε. This gives us Ω((ln(1/ε)/ε2)1/ω + (ln(1/ε))1/(1−ω)), which
is optimized when ω approaches one. Considering the dependence only on β, recall that Vmax =
Rmax/(2β), therefore the complexity is ˜Ω(1/β4/ω + 1/β1/(1−ω)) which is optimized for ω = 4/5.
The following theorem bounds the time for linear learning rate.
Theorem 3 Let QT be the value of the synchronous Q-learning algorithm using linear learning rate
at time T. Then for any positive constant ψ with probability at least 1−δ, we have ||QT −Q∗|| ≤ε,
given that
T = Ω

((2+ψ)
1
β ln(Vmax
ε
)V 2
max ln(|S| |A|Vmax
δβψε
)
(ψβε)2

.
Next we state our results to asynchronous Q-learning. The bounds are similar to those of syn-
chronous Q-learning, but have the extra dependency on the covering time L.
Theorem 4 Let QT be the value of the asynchronous Q-learning algorithm using polynomial learn-
ing rate at time T. Then with probability at least 1−δ, we have ||QT −Q∗|| ≤ε, given that
T = Ω




L1+3ωV 2
max ln(|S| |A|Vmax
δβε
)
β2ε2


1
ω
+
L
β ln Vmax
ε

1
1−ω



The dependence on the covering time, in the above theorem, is Ω(L2+1/ω +L1/(1−ω)), which is
optimized for ω ≈0.77. For the linear learning rate the dependence is much worse, since it has to
be that L ≥|S|·|A|, as is stated in the following theorem.
Theorem 5 Let QT be the value of the asynchronous Q-learning algorithm using linear learning
rate at time T. Then with probability at least 1−δ, for any positive constant ψ we have ||QT −Q∗|| ≤
ε, given that
T = Ω

(L+ψL+1)
1
β ln Vmax
ε
V 2
max ln(|S| |A|Vmax
δβεψ
)
(ψβε)2


5


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
The following theorem shows that a linear learning rate may require an exponential dependence
on 1/(2β) = 1/(1 −γ), thus showing that the gap between linear learning rate and polynomial
learning rate is real and does exist for some MDPs.
Theorem 6 There exists a deterministic MDP, M, such that Q-learning with linear learning rate
after T = Ω((1
ε)
1
1−γ ) steps has ∥QT −Q∗
M∥> ε.
5. Experiments
In this section we present experiments using two types of MDPs as well as one we call M0, which
is used in the lower bound example from Section 10. The two MDP types are the “random MDP”
and “line MDP”. Each type contains n states and two actions for each state.
We generate the “random MDP” as follows: For every state i, action a and state j, we assign
a random number ni,j(a) uniformly from [0,1]. The probability of a transition from state i to state
j while performing action a is pi,j(a) =
ni,j(a)
∑k ni,k(a). The reward R(s,a) is deterministic and chosen at
random uniformly in the interval [0,10].
For the line MDP, all the states are integers and the transition probability from state i to state j
is proportional to
1
|i−j|, where i ̸= j. The reward distribution is identical to that of the random MDP.
(We implemented the random function using the function rand() in C.)
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Learning rate
precision
Random MDP
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Learning rate
precision
Line MDP
Figure 1: Example of 100 states MDP (both line and random), where the discount factor is γ = 0.7.
We ran asynchronous Q-learning using a random exploration policy for 108 steps.
Figure 1 demonstrates the relation between the exponent of the learning rate ω and the accuracy
of the model. The best experimental value for ω is about 0.85. Note that when ω approaches one (a
linear learning rate), the precision deteriorates. This behavior coincides with our theoretical results
on two points. First, our theoretical results predict bad behavior when the learning rate approaches
6


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
one (an exponential lower and upper bound). Second, the experiments suggest an optimal value for
ω of approximately 0.85. Our theoretical results derive optimal values of optimal ω for different
settings of the parameters but most give a similar range. Furthermore, the two types of MDP have
similar behavior, which implies that the difference between linear and polynomial learning rates is
inherent to many MDPs and not only special cases (as in the lower bound example).
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
Discount factor
precision
Random MDP
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
Discount factor
precision
Line MDP
Figure 2: Example of 10 state MDPs (both random and line) using two different learning rates
for Q-learning. Both use random exploration policy for 107 steps. The solid line is
asynchronous Q-learning using ω = 0.7; the dashed line is asynchronous Q-learning using
a linear learning rate (ω = 1.0).
Figure 2 demonstrates the strong relationship between discount factor, γ, and convergence rate.
In this experiment, we again see similar behavior in both MDPs. When the discount factor ap-
proaches one, Q-learning using linear learning rate estimation of the Q value becomes unreliable,
while Q-learning using learning rate of ω = 0.7 remains stable (the error is below 0.1).
Figure 3 compares two different learning rates ω = 0.6 and ω = 0.9 for ten state MDPs (both ran-
dom and line) and ﬁnds an interesting tradeoff. For low precision levels, the learning rate of ω = 0.6
was superior, while for high precision levels the learning rate of ω = 0.9 was superior. An explana-
tion for this behavior is that the dependence in terms of ε is Ω((ln(1/ε)/ε2)1/ω +(ln(1/ε))1/(1−ω)),
which is optimized as the learning rate approaches one.
Our last experimental result is M0, the lower bound example from Section 10. Here the differ-
ence between the learning rates is the most signiﬁcant, as shown in Figure 4.
6. Background from Stochastic Algorithms
Before we derive our proofs, we ﬁrst introduce the proof given by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996) for
the convergence of stochastic iterative algorithms; in Section 7 we show that Q-learning algorithms
fall in this category. In this section we review the proof for convergence in the limit, and in the next
sections we will analyze the rate at which different Q-learning algorithms converge. (We will try
to keep the background as close as possible to the needs for this paper rather than giving the most
general results.)
7


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
102
103
104
105
106
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
Steps number
precision
Random MDP
102
103
104
105
106
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
101
Steps number
precision
Line MDP
Figure 3: Random and Line MPDs (10 states each), where the discount factor is γ = 0.9. The
dashed line is synchronous Q-learning using ω = 0.9 and the the solid line is synchronous
Q-learning using ω = 0.6.
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Steps number
precision
Lower Bound Example MDP
Figure 4: Lower bound example M0, with discount factor γ = 0.9. Q-learning ran with two different
learning rates, linear (dashed line) and ω = 0.65 (solid line).
This section considers a general type of iterative stochastic algorithms, which is computed as
follows:
Xt+1(i) = (1−αt(i))Xt(i)+αt(i)((HtXt)(i)+wt(i)),
(2)
where wt is a bounded random variable with zero expectation, and each Ht is assumed to belong to
a family H of pseudo contraction mappings (See Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996) for details).
Deﬁnition 7 An iterative stochastic algorithm is well-behaved if:
8


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
1. The step size αt(i) satisﬁes (1) ∑∞
t=0 αt(i) = ∞, (2) ∑∞
t=0 α2
t (i) < ∞and (3) αt(i) ∈(0,1).
2. There exists a constant A that bounds wt(i) for any history Ft, i.e., ∀t,i : |wt(i)| ≤A.
3. There exists γ ∈[0,1) and a vector X∗such that for any X we have ||HtX −X∗|| ≤γ||X −X∗||.
The main theorem states that a well-behaved stochastic iterative algorithm converges in the
limit.
Theorem 8 [Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996)] Let Xt be the sequence generated by a well-behaved
stochastic iterative algorithm. Then Xt converges to X∗with probability 1.
The following is an outline of the proof given by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996). Without loss
of generality, assume that X∗= 0 and ∥X0∥≤A. The value of Xt is bounded since ∥X0∥≤A and for
any history Ft we have ∥wt∥≤A; hence, for any t we have ∥Xt∥≤A.
Recall that β = 1−γ
2 . Let D1 = A and Dk+1 = (1 −β)Dk for k ≥1. Clearly the sequence Dk
converges to zero. We prove by induction that for every k there exists some time τk such that for
any t ≥τk we have ∥Xt∥≤Dk. Note that this will guarantee that at time t ≥τk for any i the value
∥Xt(i)∥is in the interval [−Dk,Dk].
The proof is by induction. Assume that there is such a time τk and we show that there exists a
time τk+1 such that for t ≥τk+1 we have ∥Xt∥≤Dk+1. Since Dk converges to zero this proves that
Xt converges to zero, which equals X∗. For the proof we deﬁne for t ≥τ the quantity
Wt+1;τ(i) = (1−αt(i))Wt;τ(i)+αt(i)wt(i),
where Wτ;τ(i) = 0. The value of Wt;τ bounds the contributions of wj(i), j ∈[τ,t], to the value of Xt
(starting from time τ). We also deﬁne for t ≥τk,
Yt+1;τ(i) = (1−αt(i))Yt;τ(i)+αt(i)γDk
where Yτk;τk = Dk. Notice that Yt;τk is a deterministic process. The following lemma gives the
motivation for the deﬁnition of Yt;τk.
Lemma 9 [Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996)] For every i, we have
−Yt;τk(i)+Wt;τk(i) ≤Xt(i) ≤Yt;τk(i)+Wt;τk(i)
Next we use Lemma 9 to complete the proof of Theorem 8. From the deﬁnition of Yt;τ and the
assumption that ∑∞
t=0 αt = ∞, it follows that Yt;τ converges to γDk as t goes to inﬁnity. In addition
Wt;τk converges to zero as t goes to inﬁnity. Therefore there exists a time τk+1 such that Yt;τ ≤
(γ+ β
2)Dk, and |Wt;τk| ≤βDk/2. This fact, together with Lemma. 9, yields that for t ≥τk+1,
||Xt|| ≤(γ+β)Dk = Dk+1,
which completes the proof of Theorem 8.
9


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
7. Applying the Stochastic Theorem to Q-learning
In this section we show that both synchronous and asynchronous Q-learning are well-behaved it-
erative stochastic algorithms. The proof is similar in spirit to the proof given by Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis (1996) At the beginning we deal with synchronous Q-learning. First deﬁne operator H as
(HQ)(i,a) =
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)(R(i,a)+γ max
b∈U(j)Q(j,b))
Rewriting Q-learning with H, we get
Qt+1(i,a) = (1−αt(i,a))Qt(i,a)+αt(i,a)((HQt)(i,a)+wt(i,a)).
Let ¯i is the state reached by performing at time t action a in state i and r(i,s) is the reward observed
at time i; then
wt(i,s) = r(i,s)+γ max
b∈U(¯i)Qt(¯i,b)−
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)

R(i,a)+γ max
b∈U(j)Qt(j,b)

In synchronous Q-learning, H is computed simultaneously on all states actions pairs.
Lemma 10 Synchronous Q-learning is a well-behaved iterative stochastic algorithm.
Proof We know that for any history Ft E[wt(i,a)|Ft] = 0 and |wt(i,a)| ≤Vmax. We also know that
for 1
2 < ω ≤1 we have that ∑αt(s,a) = ∞, ∑α2
t (s,a) < ∞and αt(s,a) ∈(0,1).
We need only show that H satisﬁes the contraction property.
|(HQ)(i,a)−(H ¯Q)(i,a)|
≤
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)|γ max
b∈U(j)Q(j,b)−γ max
b∈U(j)
¯Q(j,b)|
=
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)γ| max
b∈U(j)Q(j,b)−max
b∈U(j)
¯Q(j,b)|
≤
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)γ max
b∈U(j)|Q(j,b)−¯Q(j,b)|
≤
γ
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)∥Q−¯Q∥≤γ∥Q−¯Q∥
Since we update all (i,a) pairs simultaneously, synchronous Q-learning is well-behaved stochas-
tic iterative algorithm.
We next show that Theorem 8 can be applied also to asynchronous Q-learning.
Lemma 11 Asynchronous Q-learning, where the input sequence has a ﬁnite covering time L, is a
well-behaved iterative stochastic algorithm.
Proof We deﬁne HQ for every start state i and start time t1 of a phase (beginning of the covering
time) until the end of the phase (completing the covering time) at time t2, during which all state-
action pairs are updated. Since a state action can be performed more than once, HQ(i,a) can be
10


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
performed more than once. We consider time t, in which the policy performs action a at state i and
Qt is the vector. We have that
|(HQt)(i,a)−(HQ∗)(i,a)|
≤
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)|γ max
b∈U(j)Qt(j,b)−γ max
b∈U(j)Q∗(j,b)|
=
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)γ| max
b∈U(j)Qt(j,b)−max
b∈U(j)Q∗(j,b)|
≤
n
∑
j=0
Pij(a)γ max
b∈U(j)|Qt(j,b)−Q∗(j,b)|
≤∑
j∈A
Pij(a)γ max
b∈U(j)|Qt(j,b)−Q∗(j,b)|
+ ∑
j∈B
Pij(a)γ max
b∈U(j)|Qt(j,b)−Q∗(j,b)|
≤
γ∥Qt −Q∗∥,
where A includes the states for which during (t1,t) all the actions in U(i) were performed, and
B = S −A. We conclude that ∥Qt′ −Q∗∥≤∥Qt′−1 −Q∗∥, since we only change at each time a sin-
gle state-action pair, which satisﬁes |HQt(i,a)−Q∗(i,a)| ≤γ|Qt −Q∗|. We look at the operator H
after performing all state-action pairs, ∥HQ −Q∗∥≤maxi,a|HQt(i,a) −Q∗(i,a)| ≤γ∥Qt −Q∗∥≤
γ∥Q−Q∗∥.
8. Synchronous Q-learning
In this section we give the proof of Theorems 2 and 3. Our main focus will be the value of rt =
∥Qt −Q∗∥, and our aim is to bound the time until rt ≤ε. We use a sequence of values Di, such
that Dk+1 = (1−β)Dk and D1 = Vmax. As in Section 6, we will consider times τk such that for any
t ≥τk we have rt ≤Dk. We call the time between τk and τk+1 the kth iteration. (Note the distinction
between a step of the algorithm and an iteration, which is a sequence of many steps.)
Our proof has two parts. The ﬁrst (and simple) part is bounding the number of iterations until
Di ≤ε. The bound is derived in the following Lemma.
Lemma 12 For m ≥1
β ln(Vmax/ε) we have Dm ≤ε.
Proof We have that D1 = Vmax and Di = (1 −β)Di−1. We want to ﬁnd the m that satisﬁes Dm =
Vmax(1−β)m ≤ε. By taking a logarithm over both sides of the inequality we get m ≥1
β ln(Vmax/ε).
The second (and much more involved) part is to bound the number of steps in an iteration. We
use the following quantities introduced in Section 6. Let Wt+1,τ(s,a) = (1 −αω
t (s,a))Wt,τ(s,a) +
αω
t (s,a)wt(s,a), where Wτ;τ(s,a) = 0 and
wt(s,a) = R(s,a)+γ max
b∈U(s′)Qt(s′,b)−
|S|
∑
j=1
Ps,j(a)

R(s,a)+γ max
b∈U(j)Qt(j,b)

,
11


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
where s′ is the state reached after performing action a at state s. Let
Yt+1;τk(s,a) = (1−αω
t (s,a))Yt;τk(s,a)+αω
t (s,a)γDk,
where Yτk;τk(s,a) = Dk. Our ﬁrst step is to rephrase Lemma 9 for our setting.
Lemma 13 For every state s action a and time τk, we have
−Yt;τk(s,a)+Wt;τk(s,a) ≤Q∗(s,a)−Qt(s,a) ≤Yt;τk(s,a)+Wt;τk(s,a)
The above lemma suggests (once again) that in order to bound the error rt one can bound Yt;τk
and Wt;τk separately, and the two bounds imply a bound on rt. We ﬁrst bound the Yt term, which is
deterministic process, and then we bound the term, Wt;τ, which is stochastic.
8.1 Synchronous Q-learning using a Polynomial Learning Rate
We start with Q-learning using a polynomial learning rate and show that the duration of iteration k,
which starts at time τk and ends at time τk+1, is bounded by τω
k . For synchronous Q-learning with a
polynomial learning rate we deﬁne τk+1 = τk +τω
k , where τ1 will be speciﬁed latter.
Lemma 14 Consider synchronous Q-learning with a polynomial learning rate and assume that for
any t ≥τk we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤Dk. Then for any t ≥τk +τω
k = τk+1 we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤Dk(γ+ 2
eβ).
Proof Let Yτk;τk(s,a) = γDk +ρτk, where ρτk = (1−γ)Dk. We can now write
Yt+1;τk(s,a) = (1−αω
t )Yt;τk(s,a)+αω
t γDk = γDk +(1−αω
t )ρt,
where ρt+1 = ρt(1−αω
t ). We would like to show that after time τk+1 = τk +τω
k for any t ≥τk+1 we
have ρt ≤2
eβDk. By deﬁnition we can rewrite ρt as
ρt = (1−γ)Dk
t−τk
∏
l=1
(1−αω
l+τk) = 2βDk
t−τk
∏
l=1
(1−αω
l+τk) = 2βDk
t−τk
∏
l=1
(1−
1
(l +τk)ω ),
where the last identity follows from the fact that αω
t = 1/tω. Since the αω
t ’s are monotonically
decreasing
ρt ≤2βDk(1−1
τω
k
)t−τk.
For t ≥τk +τω
k we have
ρt ≤2βDk(1−1
τω
k
)τω
k ≤2
eβDk.
Hence, Yt;τk(s,a) ≤(γ+ 2
eβ)Dk.
Next we bound the term Wt;τk by (1−2
e)βDk. The sum of the bounds for Wt;τk(s,a) and Yt;τk(s,a)
would be (γ+β)Dk = (1−β)Dk = Dk+1, as desired.
Deﬁnition 15 Let Wt;τk(s,a) = (1−αω
t (s,a))Wt−1;τk(s,a)+αω
t (s,a)wt(s,a)
= ∑t
i=τk+1 ηk,t
i (s,a)wi(s,a) , where ηk,t
i (s,a) = αω
i+τk(s,a)∏t
j=τk+i+1(1−αω
j (s,a)) and letW l
t;τk(s,a) =
∑τk+l
i=τk+1 ηk,t
i (s,a)wi(s,a).
12


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
Note that in the synchronous model αω
t (s,a) and ηk,t
i (s,a) are identical for every state action pair.
We also note that Wt−τk+1
t;τk
(s,a) = Wt;τk(s,a). We have bounded the term Yt;τk, for t = τk+1. This
bound holds for any t ≥τk+1, since the sequence Yt;τk is monotonically decreasing. In contrast, the
term Wt;τk is stochastic. Therefore it is not sufﬁcient to bound Wτk+1;τk, but we need to bound Wt;τk
for t ≥τk+1. However, it is sufﬁcient to consider t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]. The following lemma bounds the
coefﬁcients in that interval.
Lemma 16 For any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] and i ∈[τk,t], we have ηk,t
i
= Θ( 1
τkω ),
Proof Since ηk,t
i
= αω
i+τk ∏t
j=τk+i+1(1 −αω
j ),we can divide ηk,t
t
into two parts, the ﬁrst one αω
i+τk
and the second one µ = ∏t
j=τk+i+1(1 −αω
j ). We show that the ﬁrst one is Θ( 1
τω
k ) and the second is
constant.
Since αω
i+τk are monotonically decreasing we have for every i ∈[τk,τk+2] we have αω
τk ≤αω
i ≤αω
τk+2,
thus 1
τω
k ≤αω
t ≤
1
(τk+1+τω
k+1)ω ≤
1
(3τω
k +τk)ω <
1
4τω
k . Next we bound µ. Clearly µ is bounded from above
by 1. Also µ ≥∏
τk+2
j=τk(1−α j) ≥(1−
1
τkω )3τkω ≥1
e3 . Therefore, we have that for every t ∈[τk,τk+2],
ηk,t
i
= Θ( 1
τkω ).
We introduce Azuma’s inequality, which bounds the deviations of a martingale. The use of
Azuma’s inequality is mainly needed for the asynchronous case.
Lemma 17 (Azuma 1967) Let X0,X1,...,Xn be a martingale sequence such that for each 1 ≤k ≤n,
|Xk −Xk−1| ≤ck,
where the constant ck may depend on k. Then for all n ≥1 and any ε > 0
Pr[|Xn −X0| > ε] ≤2e
−
ε
2∑n
k=1 c2
k
Next we show that Azuma’s inequality can be applied to W l
t;τk.
Lemma 18 For any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] and 1 ≤l ≤t we have that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence,
which satisﬁes
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| ≤Θ(Vmax
τω
k
)
Proof We ﬁrst note that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence, since
E[W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
E[ηk,t
τk+l(s,a)wτk+l(s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
ηk,t
τk+lE[wτk+l(s,a)|Fτk+l−1] = 0.
By Lemma 16 we have that ηk,t
l (s,a) = Θ(1/τω
k ), thus
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| = ηk,t
τk+l(s,a)|wτk+l(s,a)| ≤Θ(Vmax
τω
k
).
The following lemma provides a bound for the stochastic error caused by the term Wt;τk by using
Azuma’s inequality.
13


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
Lemma 19 Consider synchronous Q-learning with a polynomial learning rate. With probability at
least 1−δ
m we have |Wt;τk| ≤(1−2
e)βDk for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2], i.e.,
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≤(1−2
e)βDk

≥1−δ
m
given that τk = Θ((V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δβDk))
β2D2
k
)1/ω).
Proof By Lemma 18 we can apply Azuma’s inequality to Wt−τk+1
t;τk
with ci = Θ(Vmax
τω
k ) (note that
Wt−τk+1
t;τk
= Wt;τk) . Therefore, we derive that
Pr[|Wt;τk(s,a)| ≥˜ε | t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]]
≤
2e
−2˜ε2
∑t
i=τk c2
i ≤2e−cτω
k ˜ε2/V 2
max,
for some constant c > 0. Set ˜δk = 2e−cτω
k ˜ε2/V 2
max, which holds for τω
k = Θ(ln(1/˜δ)V 2
max/ ˜ε2). Using
the union bound we have,
Pr[∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : Wt;τk(s,a) ≤˜ε] ≤
τk+2
∑
t=τk+1
Pr[Wt;τk(s,a) ≤˜ε],
thus taking ˜δk =
δ
m(τk+2−τk+1)|S||A| assures that with probability at least 1 −δ
m the statement hold at
every state-action pair and time t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]. As a result we have,
τk = Θ

(V 2
max ln(|S| |A| mτω
k /δ)
˜ε2
)1/ω

= Θ

(V 2
max ln(|S| |A| mVmax/δ˜ε)
˜ε2
)1/ω

Setting ˜ε = (1−2/e)βDk gives the desire bound.
We have bounded for each iteration the time needed to achieve the desired precision level with
probability 1−δ
m. The following lemma provides a bound for the error in all the iterations.
Lemma 20 Consider synchronous Q-learning using a polynomial learning rate. With probability
at least 1−δ, for every iteration k ∈[1,m] and time t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] we have Wt;τk ≤(1−2
e)βDk, i.e.,
Pr

∀k ∈[1,m], ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≤(1−2
e)βDk

≥1−δ,
given that τ0 = Θ((V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|/(δβε))
β2ε2
)1/ω).
Proof From Lemma 19 we know that
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥(1−2
e)βDk

= Pr
"
∀s,a ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] :
t
∑
i=τk
wi(s,a)ηk,t
i
≥˜ε
#
≤δ
m
14


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
Using the union bound we have,
Pr
"
∀s,a ∀k ≤m,∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]
t
∑
i=τk
wi(s,a)ηk,t
i
≥˜ε
#
≤
m
∑
k=1
Pr
"
∀s,a ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]
t
∑
i=τk
wi(s,a)ηk,t
i
≥˜ε
#
≤δ
where ˜ε = (1−2
e)βDk.
We have bounded both the size of each iteration, as a function of its starting time, and the
number of the iterations needed. The following lemma solves the recurrence τk+1 = τk + τω
k and
bounds the total time required (which is a special case of Lemma 32).
Lemma 21 Let
ak+1 = ak +aω
k = a0 +
k
∑
i=0
aω
i .
For any constant ω ∈(0,1), ak = O((a1−ω
0
+k)
1
1−ω ) = O(ao +k
1
1−ω )
The proof of Theorem 2 follows from Lemma 21, Lemma 20, Lemma 12 and Lemma 14.
8.2 Synchronous Q-learning using a Linear Learning Rate
In this subsection, we derive results for Q-learning with a linear learning rate. The proof is very
similar in spirit to the proof of Theorem 2 and we give here analogous lemmas to the ones in
Subsection 8.1. First, the number of iterations required for synchronous Q-learning with a linear
learning rate is the same as that for a polynomial learning rate. Therefore, we only need to analyze
the number of steps in an iteration.
Lemma 22 Consider synchronous Q-learning with a linear learning rate and assume that for any
t ≥τk we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤Dk. Then for any t ≥(2+ψ)τk = τk+1 we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤Dk(γ+
2
2+ψβ)
Proof Let Yτk;τk(s,a) = γDk +ρτk, where ρτk = (1−γ)Dk. We can now write
Yt+1;τk(s,a) = (1−αt)Yt;τk(s,a)+αtγDk = γDk +(1−αt)ρt,
where ρt+1 = ρt(1−αt). We would like show that after time (2+ψ)τk = τk+1 for any t ≥τk+1 we
have ρt ≤βDk. By deﬁnition we can rewrite ρt as,
ρt = (1−γ)Dk
t−τk
∏
l=1
(1−αl+τk) = 2βDk
t−τk
∏
l=1
(1−αl+τk) = 2βDk
t−τk
∏
l=1
(1−
1
l +τk
),
where the last identity follows from the fact that αt = 1/t. Simplifying the expression, and setting
t = (2+ψ)τk, we have
ρt ≤2Dkβτk
t = 2Dkβ
2+ψ
15


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
Hence, Yt;τk(s,a) ≤(γ+
2
2+ψβ)Dk.
The following lemma enables the use of Azuma’s inequality.
Lemma 23 For any t ≥τk and 1 ≤l ≤t we have that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence, which
satisﬁes
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| ≤Vmax
t
Proof We ﬁrst note that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence, since
E[W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
E[ηk,t
τk+l(s,a)wτk+l(s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
ηk,t
τk+lE[wτk+l(s,a)|Fτk+l−1] = 0.
For linear learning rate we have that ηk,t
l+τk(s,a) = 1/t, thus
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| = wτk+l(s,a)
t
≤Vmax
t
.
The following Lemma provides a bound for the stochastic term Wt;τk.
Lemma 24 Consider synchronous Q-learning with a linear learning rate. With probability at least
1−δ
m, we have |Wt;τk| ≤
ψ
2+ψβDk for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] and any positive constant ψ, i.e.
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : Wt;τk ≤
ψ
2+ψβDk

≥1−δ
m
given that τk = Θ(V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(ψδβDk))
ψ2β2D2
k
)
Proof By Lemma 23 for any t ≥τk+1 we can apply Azuma’s inequality to Wt−τk+1
t;τk
with ci = Vmax
i+τk
(note that Wt−τk+1
t;τk
= Wt;τk). Therefore, we derive that
Pr[|Wt;τk| ≥˜ε | t ≥τk+1] ≤2e
−2˜ε2
∑t
i=τk c2
i = 2e
−c
t2˜ε2
(t−τk)V2max ≤2e
−c t˜ε2
V2max
for some positive constant c. Using the union bound we get
Pr[∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥˜ε]
≤
Pr[∀t ≥(2+ψ)τk : |Wt;τk| ≥˜ε]
≤
∞
∑
t=(2+ψ)τk
Pr[|Wt;τk| ≥˜ε]
≤
∞
∑
t=(2+ψ)τk
2e
−c t˜ε2
V2max = 2e
−c ((2+ψ)τk)˜ε2
V2max
∞
∑
t=0
e
−
t˜ε
V2max
=
2e
−c (2+ψ)τk˜ε2
V2max
1−e
−˜ε2
V2max
= Θ(e
−c′τk ˜ε2
V2max V 2
max
˜ε2
),
16


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
where the last equality is due to Taylor expansion and c′ is some positive constant. By setting
δ
m |S| |A| = Θ(e
−c′τk ˜ε2
V2max V 2
max
˜ε2
), which holds for τk = Θ(V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δ˜ε))
˜ε2
), and ˜ε =
ψ
2+ψβDk assures us
that for every t ≥τk+1 (and as a result for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]) with probability at least 1 −δ
m the
statement holds at every state-action pair.
We have bounded for each iteration the time needed to achieve the desired precision level with
probability 1−δ
m. The following lemma provides a bound for the error in all the iterations.
Lemma 25 Consider synchronous Q-learning using a linear learning rate. With probability 1−δ,
for every iteration k ∈[1,m], time t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] and any constant ψ > 0 we have |Wt;τk| ≤ψβDk
2+ψ ),
i.e.,
Pr

∀k ∈[1,m], ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≤ψβDk
2+ψ

≥1−δ,
given that τ0 = Θ(V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(ψδβε))
ψ2β2ε2
).
Proof From Lemma 19 we know that
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥ψβDk
2+ψ

≤δ
m
Using the union bound we have that,
Pr

∀k ≤m,∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥ψβDk
2+ψ

≤
m
∑
k=1
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥ψβDk
2+ψ

≤δ
The proof of Theorem 5 follows from Lemmas 25 and 22, 12 and the fact that ak+1 = (2 +
ψ)ak = (2+ψ)ka1.
9. Asynchronous Q-learning
The major difference between synchronous and asynchronous Q-learning is that asynchronous Q-
learning updates only one state action pair at each time while synchronous Q-learning updates all
state-action pairs at each time unit. This causes two difﬁculties: the ﬁrst is that different updates
use different values of the Q function in their update. This problem is fairly easy to handle given
the machinery introduced. The second, and more basic problem is that each state-action pair should
occur enough times for the update to progress. To ensure this, we introduce the notion of covering
time, denoted by L. We ﬁrst extend the analysis of synchronous Q-learning to asynchronous Q-
learning, in which each run always has covering time L, which implies that from any start state, in
L steps all state-action pairs are performed. Later we relax the requirement such that the condition
holds only with probability 1/2, and show that with high probability we have a covering time of
LlogT for a run of length T. Note that our notion of covering time does not assume a stationary
17


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
distribution of the exploration strategy; it may be the case that at some periods of time certain state-
action pairs are more frequent while in other periods different state-action pairs are more frequent.
In fact, we do not even assume that the sequence of state-action pairs is generated by a strategy—it
can be an arbitrary sequence of state-action pairs, along with their reward and next state.
Deﬁnition 26 Let n(s,a,t1,t2) be the number of times that the state action pair (s,a) was performed
in the time interval [t1,t2].
In this section, we use the same notations as in Section 8 for Dk, τk, Yt;τk and Wt;τk, with a different
set of values for τk. We ﬁrst give the results for asynchronous Q-learning using polynomial learning
rate (Subsection 9.1); we give a similar proof for linear learning rates in Subsection 9.2.
9.1 Asynchronous Q-learning using a Polynomial Learning Rate
Our main goal is to show that the size of the kth iteration is Lτω
k . The covering time property
guarantees that in Lτω
k steps each pair of state action is performed at least τω
k times. For this reason
we deﬁne for asynchronous Q-learning with polynomial learning rate the sequence τk+1 = τk +Lτω
k ,
where τ1 will be speciﬁed later. As in Subsection 8.1 we ﬁrst bound the value of Yt;τk
Lemma 27 Consider asynchronous Q-learning with a polynomial learning rate and assume that for
any t ≥τk we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤Dk. Then for any t ≥τk +Lτω
k = τk+1 we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤D(γ+ 2
eβ)
Proof For each state-action pair (s,a) we are assured that n(s,a,τk,τk+1) ≥τω
k , since the covering
time is L and the underlying policy has made Lτω
k steps. Using the fact that the Yt;τk(s,a) are mono-
tonically decreasing and deterministic, we can apply the same argument as in the proof of Lemma
14.
The next Lemma bounds the inﬂuence of each sample wt(s,a) on Wt;τk(s,a).
Lemma 28 Let ˜wt
i+τk(s,a) = ηk,t
i (s,a)wi+τk(s,a) then for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] the random variable
˜wt
i+τk(s,a) has zero mean and bounded by (L/τk)ωVmax.
Proof Note that by deﬁnition wτk+i(s,a) has zero mean and is bounded by Vmax for any history and
state-action pair. In a time interval of length τ, by deﬁnition of the covering time, each state-action
pair is performed at least τ/L times; therefore, ηk,t
i (s,a) ≤(L/τk)ω. Looking at the expectation of
˜wi+τk(s,a) we observe that
E[ ˜wt
i+τk(s,a)] = E[ηk,t
i (s,a)wi+τk(s,a)] = ηk,t
i (s,a)E[wi+τk(s,a)] = 0
Next we prove that it is bounded as well:
| ˜wt
i+τk(s,a)|
=
|ηk,t
i (s,a)wi+τk(s,a)|
≤
|ηk,t
i (s,a)|Vmax
≤
(L/τk)ωVmax
Next we deﬁneW l
t;τk(s,a) = ∑l
i=1 ˜wt
i+τk(s,a) and prove that it is martingale sequence with bounded
differences.
18


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
Lemma 29 For any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] and 1 ≤l ≤t we have that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence,
which satisﬁes
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| ≤(L/τk)ωVmax
Proof We ﬁrst note that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence, since
E[W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
E[ ˜wt
l+τk(s,a)|Fτk+l−1] = 0.
By Lemma 28 we have that ˜wt
l+τk(s,a) is bounded by (L/τk)ωVmax, thus
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| = ˜wt
l+τk(s,a) ≤(L/τk)ωVmax.
The following Lemma bounds the value of the term Wt;τk.
Lemma 30 Consider asynchronous Q-learning with a polynomial learning rate. With probability
at least 1−δ
m we have for every state-action pair |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≤(1−2
e)βDk for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2],
i.e.
Pr

∀s,a ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≤(1−2
e)βDk

≥1−δ
m
given that τk = Θ((L1+3ωV 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δβDk))
β2D2
k
)1/ω).
Proof For each state-action pair we look on W l
t;τk(s,a) and note that Wt;τk(s,a) = Wt−τk+1
t;τk
(s,a). Let
ℓ= n(s,a,τk,t), then for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] we have that ℓ≤τk+2 −τk ≤Θ(L1+ωτω
k ). By Lemma
29 we can apply Azuma’s inequality to Wt−τk+1
t;τk
(s,a) with ci = (L/τk)ωVmax. Therefore, we derive
that
Pr[|Wt;τk(s,a)| ≥˜ε | t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]]
≤
2e
−˜ε2
2∑t
i=τk+1,i∈Ts,a c2
i ≤2e
−c
˜ε2τ2ω
k
ℓV2maxL2ω
≤
2e
−c
˜ε2τω
k
L1+3ωV2max ,
for some constant c > 0. We can set ˜δk = 2e−cτω
k ˜ε2/(L1+3ωV 2
max), which holds for τω
k = Θ(ln(1/ ˜δk)L1+3ωV 2
max/˜ε2).
Using the union bound we have
Pr[∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : Wt;τk(s,a) ≤˜ε] ≤
τk+2
∑
t=τk+1
Pr[Wt;τk(s,a) ≤˜ε],
thus taking ˜δk =
δ
m(τk+2−τk+1)|S||A| assures a certainty level of 1 −δ
m for each state-action pair. As a
result we have
τω
k = Θ(L1+3ωV 2
max ln(|S| |A| mτω
k /δ)
˜ε2
) = Θ(L1+3ωV 2
max ln(|S| |A| mVmax/(δ˜ε))
˜ε2
)
Setting ˜ε = (1−2/e)βDk give the desired bound.
We have bounded for each iteration the time needed to achieve the desired precision level with
probability 1−δ
m. The following lemma provides a bound for the error in all the iterations.
19


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
Lemma 31 Consider asynchronous Q-learning using a polynomial learning rate. With probability
1−δ, for every iteration k ∈[1,m] and time t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] we have |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≤(1−2
e)βDk, i.e.,
Pr

∀k ∈[1,m], ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2], ∀s,a : |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≤(1−2
e)βDk

≥1−δ,
given that τ0 = Θ((L1+3ωV 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δβε))
β2ε2
)1/ω).
Proof From Lemma 30 we know that
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥(1−2
e)βDk

≤δ
m
Using the union bound we have that
Pr[∀k ≤m,∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] |Wt;τk| ≥˜ε]
≤
m
∑
k=1
Pr[∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] |Wt;τk| ≥˜ε] ≤δ,
where ˜ε = (1−2
e)βDk
The following lemma solves the recurrence ∑m−1
i=0 Lτω
i +τ0 and derives the time complexity.
Lemma 32 Let
ak+1 = ak +Laω
k = a0 +
k
∑
i=0
Laω
i
Then for any constant ω ∈(0,1), ak = O((a1−ω
0
+Lk)
1
1−ω ) = O(a0 +(LK)
1
1−ω )).
Proof We deﬁne the following series
bk+1 =
k
∑
i=0
Lbω
i +b0
with an initial condition
b0 = L
1
1−ω .
We show by induction that bk ≤(L(k +1))
1
1−ω for k ≥1. For k = 0
b0 = L
1
1−ω (0+1)
1
1−ω ≤L
1
1−ω
We assume that the induction hypothesis holds for k −1 and prove it for k,
bk = bk−1 +Lbω
k−1 ≤(Lk)
1
1−ω +L(Lk)
ω
1−ω ≤L
1
1−ω k
ω
1−ω (k +1) ≤(L(k +1))
1
1−ω
and the claim is proved.
Now we lower bound bk by (L(k +1)/2)1/(1−ω). For k = 0
b0 = L
1
1−ω ≥(L
2)
1
1−ω
20


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
Assume that the induction hypothesis holds for k −1 and prove for k,
bk
=
bk−1 +Lbω
k−1 = (Lk/2)
1
1−ω +L(Lk/2)
ω
1−ω = L
1
1−ω ((k/2)
1
1−ω +(k/2)
ω
1−ω )
≥
L
1
1−ω ((k +1)/2)
1
1−ω .
For a0 > L
1
1−ω we can view the series as starting at bk = a0. From the lower bound we know that
the start point has moved Θ(a1−ω
0
/L). Therefore we have a total complexity of O((a1−ω
0
+Lk)
1
1−ω ) =
O(a0 +(LK)
1
1−ω )).
The proof of Theorem 4 follows from Lemmas 27, 31,12 and 32. In the following lemma we relax
the condition of the covering time.
Lemma 33 Assume that from any start state with probability 1/2 in L steps we perform all state
action pairs. Then with probability 1 −δ, from any start state we perform all state action pairs in
Llog2(1/δ) steps, for a run of length [Llog2(1/δ)].
Proof The proof follows from the fact that after k intervals of length L (where k is a natural num-
ber), the probability of not visiting all state action pairs is 2−k. Since we have k = [log2(1/δ)] we
get that the probability of failing is δ.
Corollary 34 Assume that from any start state with probability 1/2 in L steps we perform all state
action pairs. Then with probability 1 −δ, from any start state we perform all state action pairs in
Llog(T/δ) steps, for a run of length T.
9.2 Asynchronous Q-learning using a Linear Learning Rate
In this section we consider asynchronous Q-learning with a linear learning rate. Our main goal is
to show that the size of the kth iteration is L(1 + ψ)τk, for any constant ψ > 0. The covering time
property guarantees that in (1+ψ)Lτk steps each pair of state action is performed at least (1+ψ)τk
times. The sequence of times in this case is τk+1 = τk + (1 + ψ)Lτk, where the τ0 will be deﬁned
latter. We ﬁrst bound Yt;τk and then bound the stochastic term Wt;τk.
Lemma 35 Consider asynchronous Q-learning with a polynomial learning rate and assume that
for any t ≥τk we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤Dk. Then for any t ≥τk +(1+ψ)Lτk = τk+1 we have Yt;τk(s,a) ≤
(γ+
2
2+ψβ)Dk
Proof For each state-action pair (s,a) we are assured that n(s,a,τk,τk+1) ≥(1+ψ)τk , since in an
interval of (1+ψ)Lτk steps each state-action pair is visited at least (1+ψ)τk times by the deﬁnition
of the covering time. Using the fact that the Yt;τk(s,a) are monotonically decreasing and determin-
istic (thus independent), we can apply the same argument as in the proof of Lemma 22.
The following Lemma enables the use of Azuma’s inequality.
21


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
Lemma 36 For any t ≥τk and 1 ≤l ≤t we have that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence, which
satisﬁes
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| ≤
Vmax
n(s,a,0,t)
Proof We ﬁrst note that W l
t;τk(s,a) is a martingale sequence, since
E[W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
E[ηk,t
τk+l(s,a)wτk+l(s,a)|Fτk+l−1]
=
ηk,t
τk+lE[wτk+l(s,a)|Fτk+l−1] = 0.
For a linear learning rate we have that ηk,t
τk+l(s,a) = 1/n(s,a,0,t), thus
|W l
t;τk(s,a)−W l−1
t;τk (s,a)| = ηk,t
τk+l(s,a)|wτk+l(s,a)| ≤
Vmax
n(s,a,0,t).
The following lemma bounds the value of the term Wt;τk.
Lemma 37 Consider asynchronous Q-learning with a linear learning rate. With probability at
least 1 −δ
m we have for every state-action pair |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≤
ψ
2+ψβDk for any t ≥τk+1 and any
positive constant ψ, i.e.
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+1] : Wt;τk(s,a) ≤
ψ
2+ψβDk

≥1−δ
m
given that τk ≥Θ((V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δβDkψ))
ψ2β2D2
k
)).
Proof By Lemma 36 we can apply Azuma’s inequality on Wt−τk+1
t;τk
(We note that Wt−τk+1
t;τk
= Wt;τk)
with ci = Θ(
Vmax
n(s,a,0,t ) for any t ≥τk+1. Therefore, we derive that
Pr[|Wt;τk| ≥˜ε]
≤
2e
−2˜ε2
∑t
i=τk,i∈Ts,a c2
i ≤2e
−c n(s,a,τk,t)˜ε2
V2max
,
for some positive constant c. Let us deﬁne the following variable
ζt(s,a) =
 1, αt(s,a) ̸= 0
0, otherwise
Using the union bound and the fact in an interval of length (1+ψ)Lτk each state-action pair is
visited at least (1+ψ)τk times, we get
Pr[∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≥˜ε]
≤
Pr[∀t ≥((1+ψ)L+1)τk : |Wt;τk(s,a)| ≥˜ε]
≤
∞
∑
t=((1+ψ)L+1)τk
Pr[|Wt;τk(s,a)| ≥˜ε]
22


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
≤
∞
∑
t=((1+ψ)L+1)τk
ζt(s,a)2e
−c n(s,a,0,t)˜ε2
V2max
≤
2e
−c ((1+ψ)τk)˜ε2
V2max
∞
∑
t=0
e
−
t˜ε2
2V2max
=
2e
−c (1+ψ)τk˜ε2
V2max
1−e
−˜ε2
V2max
= Θ(e
−c′τk ˜ε2
V2max V 2
max
˜ε2
),
for some positive constant c′. Setting
δ
m |S| |A| = Θ(e
−c′τk ˜ε2
V2max V 2
max
˜ε2
), which hold for τk = Θ(V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δ˜ε))
˜ε2
),
and ˜ε =
ψ
2+ψβDk assures us that for every t ≥τk+1 (and as a result for any t ∈[τk+1,τk+2]) with prob-
ability at least 1−δ
m the statement holds at every state-action pair.
We have bounded for each iteration the time needed to achieve the desired precision level with
probability 1−δ
m. The following lemma provides a bound for the error in all the iterations.
Lemma 38 Consider synchronous Q-learning using a linear learning rate. With probability 1−δ,
for every iteration k ∈[1,m], time t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] and any constant ψ > 0 we have |Wt;τk| ≤ψβDk
2+ψ ,
i.e.,
Pr

∀k ∈[1,m], ∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≤ψβDk
2+ψ

≥1−δ,
given that τ0 = Θ(V 2
max ln(Vmax|S| |A|m/(δβεψ))
ψ2β2ε2
).
Proof From Lemma 37 we know that
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] : |Wt;τk| ≥ψβDk
2+ψ

≤δ
m
Using the union bound we have that,
Pr

∀k ≤m,∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] |Wt;τk| ≥ψβDk
2+ψ

≤
m
∑
k=1
Pr

∀t ∈[τk+1,τk+2] |Wt;τk| ≥ψβDk
2+ψ

≤δ
Theorem 5 follows from Lemmas 35, 38, 12 and the fact that ak+1 = ak +(1+ψ)Lak = a0((1+
ψ)L+1)k.
23


EVEN-DAR AND MANSOUR
10. Lower Bound for Q-learning using a Linear Learning Rate
In this section we show a lower bound for Q-learning with a linear learning rate, which is O((1
ε)
1
1−γ ).
We consider the following MDP, denoted M0, that has a single state s, a single action a, and a
deterministic reward RM0(s,a) = 0. Since there is only one action in the MDP we denote Qt(s,a) as
Qt(s). We initialize Q0(s) = 1 and observe the time until Qt(s) ≤ε.
Lemma 39 Consider running synchronous Q-learning with linear learning rate on MDP M0, when
initializing Q0(s) = 1. Then there is a time t = c(1
ε)
1
1−γ for some constant c > 0, such that Qt ≥ε.
Proof First we prove by induction on t that
Qt(s) =
t−1
∏
i=1
i+γ
i+1.
For t = 1 we have Q1(s) = (1−1/2)Q0(s)+(1/2)γQ0(s) = (1+γ)/2. Assume the hypothesis holds
for t −1 and prove it for t. By deﬁnition,
Qt(s) = (1−1
t )Qt−1(s)+ 1
t γQt−1(s) = t −1+γ
t
Qt−1(s).
In order to help us estimate this quantity we use the Γ function. Let
Γ(x+1,k) =
1·2···k
(x+1)·(x+2)····(x+k)kx
The limit of Γ(1+x,k), as k goes to inﬁnity, is constant for any x. We can rewrite Qt(s) as
Qt(s) =
1
Γ(γ+1,t)
tγ
t +1 = Θ(tγ−1)
Therefore, there is a time t = c(1
ε)
1
1−γ , for some constant c > 0, such that Qt(s) ≥ε.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a grant from the Israel Science Foundation. Eyal Even-Dar
was partially supported by the Deutsch Institute.
References
K. Azuma. Weighted sums of certain dependent random variables. Tohoku Mathematical Journal,
68:357–367, 1967.
F. Beleznay, T. Grobler, and C. Szepesvari. Comparing value-function estimation algorithms in
undiscounted problems. Technical Report TR-99-02, Mindmaker Ltd, 1999.
24


LEARNING RATES FOR Q-LEARNING
Dimitri P. Bertsekas and John N. Tsitsiklis.
Neuro-Dynamic Programming.
Athena Scientiﬁc,
Belmont, MA, 1996.
V.S. Borkar and S.P. Meyn. The O.D.E method for convergence of stochstic approximation and
reinforcement learning. Siam J. Control, 38 (2):447–69, 2000.
Tommi Jaakkola, Michael I. Jordan, and Satinder P. Singh. On the convergence of stochastic iterative
dynamic programming algorithms. Neural Computation, 6, 1994.
Michael Kearns and Satinder P. Singh. Finite-sample convergence rates for Q-learning and indirect
algorithms. In M.J. Kearns, S.A. Solla, and D.A. Cohn, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 11, pages 996–1002, 1999.
Michael L. Littman and Gaba Szepesv´ari. A generalized reinforcement-learning model: Conver-
gence and applications. In L. Saitta, editor, Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML-96), pages 310–318, Bari, Italy, 1996. Morgan Kaufmann. URL
citeseer.nj.nec.com/littman96generalized.html.
Martin L. Puterman.
Markov Decision Processes—Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1994.
R. Sutton and A. Barto. Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press., Cambridge, MA., 1998.
C. Szepesvari. The asymptotic convergence-rate of Q-learning. In M.I. Jordan, M.J. Kearns, and
S.A. Solla, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 10, pages 1064–1070,
1998.
J. Tsitsiklis. Asynchronous stochastic approximation and Q-learning, 1994.
C. Watkins and P. Dyan. Q-learning. Machine Learning, 8(3/4):279–292, 1992.
C. J. C. H. Watkins. Learning from Delayed Rewards. PhD thesis, Cambridge, England, 1989.
25
