This article was downloaded by: [128.255.6.125] On: 01 October 2016, At: 11:42 Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS) INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA

MATHEMATICS OF

he world for nenfoccinnale in the fir

OPERATIONS RESEANCH

<!-- image -->

## To cite this article:

Martin L. Puterman, Shelby L. Brumelle,  (1979) On the Convergence of Policy Iteration in Stationary Dynamic Programming. Mathematics of Operations Research 4(1):60-69. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/moor.4.1.60

Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions

This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.

The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article's accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.

<!-- image -->

© 1979 INFORMS

Please scroll down for article-it is on subsequent pages

<!-- image -->

INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management science, and analytics.

For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

<!-- image -->

## Mathematics of Operations Research

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://pubsonline.informs.org

## On the Convergence of Policy Iteration in Stationary Dynamic Programming

Martin L. Puterman, Shelby L. Brumelle,

<!-- image -->

## ON THE CONVERGENCE OF POLICY ITERATION IN STATIONARY DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING**

## MARTIN L. PUTERMAN AND SHELBY L. BRUMELLE

The University of British Columbia

The policy iteration method of dynamic programming is studied in an abstract setting. It is soil no beaui lay a it pretoning: This el vernie rocedure sain the ra tho convergence and error bounds for the sequence of values generated by policy iteration. These results are discussed in the context of the finite state Markovian decision problem with compact action space. An example is analyzed in detail.

1. Introduction. In this paper we present a theoretical framework in which the policy iteration procedure of dynamic programming can be studied. We show that the policy iteration procedure is equivalent to the Newton-Kantorovich iteration procedure applied to the functional equation of dynamic programming. This equivalence enables us to apply the extensive theory of "Newton's Method" to the study of policy iteration. Kalaba [18] and Pollatschek and Avi-Itzhak [26] noted the equivalence between policy iteration type procedures and Newton's method. However, to our knowledge this is its first formal presentation and analysis.

This paper contains a general convergence theorem for the policy iteration procedures as well as conditions that enable us to determine its rate of convergence and bounds on its error after a finite number of iterations. In particular, we present sufficient conditions for the rate of convergence to be either superlinear or quadratic. This is of significance because the method of successive approximations (value iteration) has only a linear rate of convergence.

Policy iteration is usually attributed to Bellman [1], [2] and Howard [16]. In a series of papers and in his classic book [2], Bellman developed the technique, which he called iteration in policy space, to solve several dynamic programming problems. Howard [16] later developed a version of this procedure for Markovian decision problems which he called the policy-iteration method. In his monograph [16], he applied this procedure to discrete and continuous time finite state and action Markovian decision problems with discounted reward and average optimality criteria. He proved that this procedure is convergent in the discounted case and also in the average reward case when all states are positive recurrent under all policies. His proof is based on the observations that the sequence of iterates of this procedure is monotone and that there are only finitely many policies. Hence the algorithm converges in a finite number of iterations.

All of the convergence theory for policy improvement in the finite policy case is based on arguments similar to those of Howard. Blackwell [3] used policy iteration to establish the existence of nearly optimal or O-optimal policies. Subsequently, Miller and Veinott (22] and Veinott [36], [37] extended the results of Blackwell to sensitive discount optimality criterion. Miller [21] demonstrated the convergence of policy iteration for the finite action, continuous time problem. The convergence of policy

* Received September 7, 1976; revised February 3, 1978.

IAOR 1973 subject classification. Main: Dynamic programming. Cross Reference: Markov decision programming.

AMS 1970 subject classification. Primary 90C40. Secondary 49D15.

Key words. Dynamic programming, policy iteration, Newton's method, rate of convergence.

+ This research was partially supported by National Research Council Grants A3609 and A7538.

iteration has been shown for normalized models with sensitive discount optimality criterion by Rothblum (31] and with cumulative average reward criterion by Denardo and Miller [8] and Rothblum and Veinott [32].

Derman [10] presented conditions to ensure the convergence of policy iteration for the discrete time, denumerable state, finite action problem with average cost criterion. Kakumanu [17] showed that a subsequence of the sequence of iterates generated by policy iteration converges for the continuous time, countable state, finite action discounted Markovian decision problem. Similar results were obtained by Doshi [11] for the discounted continuous time problem with a general state space. Furukawa [14] studied measurability questions for discounted Markov decision problems and reestablished Denardo's results using potential theoretic arguments.

In the case where the set of policies is not finite, additional assumptions are necessary to ensure convergence. Denardo [7] established the convergence of a generalized policy iteration scheme under an N-stage contraction assumption. This generalization allows the possibility of several successive approximation steps between policy evaluation steps. This result is applied to Shapley's (33] stochastic games and Blackwell's [4] discounted dynamic programs to establish convergence in these settings.

Policy iteration procedures have also been applied to problems other than dynamic programs. Fleming (12] and Puterman |27] used this procedure to give a constructive proof of the existence of solutions to quasilinear parabolic differential equations that arise in the control of diffusion processes on bounded regions in E". Kalaba [181 used a variant of this procedure, quasi-linearization, to solve several nonlinear differential equations. In [26], Pollatschek and Avi-Itzhak have used policy iteration to find the value of a stochastic game.

Newton's method has been studied extensively by numerical analysts. Its generalization to the solution of operator equations is usually credited to Kantorovich (cf. Kantorovich and Akilov (20]). The rate of convergence and bounds on its error have been studied in various settings by Ortega [23], Rheinboldt [30], Ortega and Rheinboldt (25), Gragg and Tapia [15], Rall [291, Dennis (9], Vandergraft [35] and Brumelle and Puterman [6].

We briefly summarize the paper. A general dynamic programming problem is defined. Solving its optimality equation is shown to be equivalent to finding a zero of a nonlinear operator in a partially ordered linear topological space. The uniqueness of the solution of this equation is proved in Theorem 1. Theorem 2 establishes the equivalence between policy iteration and Newton's method when applied to this problem. Theorem 3 provides sufficient conditions to guarantee that the optimality when a the op in equation has a solution and that the iterates of policy iteration converge to it. Theorem 4 shows that the policy iteration procedure converges with rate I + p if the supports of the nonlinear operator satisfy a pth order Lipschitz condition. In particular, Lipschitz continuity implies quadratic convergence. Error bounds are obtained in Theorem 5. The final section applies this theory to an example.

2. Problem setting. Let V be a linear space over the reals and let CC V be a convex cone such that CN - C = (0). For x, yE V we write x &gt; y if x - yE C. For AÇ V, we write u = maX Eda if u E A and u &gt; a for all a E A.

We say that an operator T: V→ V is nonpositive, denoted T &lt; 0, if o &gt; 0 implies To € 0; 1.e., T maps C into - C. If S, T are operators mapping V into itself, we write S &gt; TiffT-S &lt;0.

We define L to be a set of linear operators mapping V onto V such that for each T € L the (necessarily linear) inverse operator T - exists and is nonpositive. A subset

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(CT: T EL) EV is given and we assume that the operator B: V → V defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

exists. The existence of B means that for each ¿ E V an operator T, € L can be selected so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The assumptions that the T'&amp; 0 for all T E L and that the maximum is attained in (1) are fundamental to this paper.

To relate these assumptions to the familiar discounted Markov decision model take To = (AP, - I) where 1 is the discount factor, » is a decision rule, P, is the corresponding transition matrix, and L is the family of operators (Ia). The operator B can be defined by (1) when the rows of P, can be selected independently and when the suprema are attained. The inverse of I is nonpositive because (AP, - 1) ' =

This paper studies the problem of finding a v* E V such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above is the functional equation of dynamic programming, except that the term * that usually appears on the left hand side of the equation has been included in T The space V is the value space and L is the policy space. The quantity or = - T-C is the value of policy T.

THEOREM 1. Suppose (3) has a solution. Then ir has a unique solution o* = maXTELUT.

PROOF. Suppose v* satisfies (3). Then for all TE L, Cy + Tu* &amp; 0. Multiplying both sides of this inequality by T-' gives * &gt; u, for all T E L. From (2), 0*= 0,..

We shall attempt to find the solution of (3) by the following policy iteration procedure:

- (i) Set n = 0 and select a To E L.
- (ii) Policy evaluation step: Find a in E V that satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iii) Policy improvement step: Find a Tn+| E L such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iv) Increment n by 1 and return to (i).

To analyze this procedure we introduce the operator Z mapping V into V. where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting (2) into (4) gives

from which the following theorem is immediate.

THEOREM 2. Suppose (Un) is generated by the policy iteration procedure above. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The importance of this result is that (5) gives an analytic representation for the policy iteration procedure. If B is Gâteaux differentiable, then I, is the derivative of

B at , and the operator Z is that of Newton's method, as in Kantorovich and Akilov [20]. In the setting of this paper, I, is a support of B at o (see Proposition 1). A generalization of Newton's method with supports replacing derivatives was first studied by Ortega and Rheinboldt [24] and extended by Brumelle and Puterman [6]. An important consequence of Theorem I is that the results and methods of these papers are applicable to the study of policy iteration.

3. Convergence theory for policy iteration. In this section we present sufficient conditions for the sequence generated by the iteration scheme based on (5) to converge to the solution of (3). We also investigate the convergence rate. The following proposition gives properties of the operators I,, B and Z which are used in the proofs of the theorems in this section.

PROPOSITION 1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

PROOF. The inequality (6) is derived by noting that Bo &gt; CT. + In and Bu = C. + T"u and subtracting. To get (7), premultiply (6) by - Tu'

Suppose Bx &gt; 0. That Zx &gt; x follows from (4) and the nonpositivity of T,!. From (6) we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose By &amp; 0. The nonnegativity of - T, ' together with (7) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By viewing the proposition in the framework of discrete time dynamic programming, we gain some insight into its meaning and significance. If x is the terminal reward, Bx can be regarded as the maximum additional reward that can result from delaying termination for one period. Thus if Bx &gt; 0 it is worthwhile to proceed for at least one period. While if By ‹ 0 no improvement is possible and y &gt; - T-'cy for all T E L. Implication (8) means that if we start from a suboptimal point, after one iteration we will still be suboptimal. Implication (9) means that if we begin policy iteration at any x, after one iteration we will be at a suboptimal point. The inequality (6) says that the policy I, is a support for B at u.

A PTL is said to be regular if v, € 0, 8 ... &amp; y implies that (Un) is convergent. The definition of regularity involves both an order concept (monotone boundedness) and a topological concept (limit). The space of real valued functions on [0, 1] with the pointwise convergence topology is regular, while C|0, 1] is not. Other examples of

In order to study the convergence of the iteration procedure defined by (5), it is necessary to introduce a topology on V. Convergence will be with respect to this topology. The space V together with the cone C and a specified Hausdorff separable topology such that C is closed is a partially ordered topological vector space (PTL) (cf. Wong and Ng (38] and Vandergraft [35]). If the topology is generated by a norm || · Il and in addition there exists a constant / such that ||x|| &lt; Ally|| whenever O &amp; x &amp; y, then V is a partially ordered normed linear space with constant I. We stress that both of these definitions include the assumption that the cone C is closed. If T is a linear operator from V to V then the norm of T, denoted by I|T||, is given by I|T|l = suphol sill Toll.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

regular spaces are E" and LP 10. l with 0&lt;p&lt; oc. We say that an operator S: V→ V is left continuous at t if lim,→ Su, = Su for any nondecreasing sequence {En) converging to t. We say that S is left continuous if S is left continuous at i for all DEV.

The following theorem gives sufficient conditions for the convergence of the sequence (5) as well as for the existence of a solution to Bi = 0. It is based on the generalization of results of Ortega and Rheinboldt [25: p. 443] and Vandergraft [35) by Brumelle and Puterman [6]. We will use the following additional notation. If x, y E V, we denote by [x. y] the set of all u E V such that x &lt; u &lt; y.

THEOREM 3. Suppose V is a regular PTL space and that there exists a y E V such that By &amp; 0. Then the sequence of iterates of the policy iteration procedure is nondecreasing and has a limit * such that * E lu,, "l for each n. Moreover. if Bu = 0 has a solution in [vo, y] then it is contained in |0*

If in addition there exists a linear operator T: V → V such that T'B is left continuous and T-'&lt; T' &lt; 0 for each T E L, then Bo* = 0.

Since 0 &gt; By = maxted (Cy + Ty) &gt; Crot Toy, it follows that y» - То сто = Up. From the method of selection of v, in the policy iteration procedure we have that Bu, ≥ Cy. + Toto = 0. Using the representation (5) together with Proposition 1 we can inductively show (ef., Brumelle and Puterman [6]) that {en) is nondecreasing and bounded above by y. Since V is assumed to be regular there exists a u* E V such that v, converges to 0*. If Bo = 0 for some v E [vo, y] then from (9) we see that in &amp; o for all n. Hence o € [u*, y].

If the conditions in the last paragraph of the theorem are satisfied then

Since (Un) is convergent, (Un) is Cauchy. That Bo* = 0 follows from the left continuity of T-'B and the assumption that the cone is closed. a

We next apply Theorem 2 to the finite state discounted Markov decision problem with compact action space. Denote the state space by S, the action space by A, the discount factor by A (0 &lt; 1 &lt; l), and assume that the one period reward function c(s, a) and the probability transition function p(· (s, a) are upper-semicontinuous in a for each s. Choose V to be n-dimensional Euclidean space with supremum norm topology. The closed cone C is the set of vectors with nonnegative components. Clearly V is a regular PTL space. Choosing y(s) = M/(1 - 1) for sE S where them is saise ives . The he this in the sent para sage a the values converging to a solution of the optimality equation. That the solution is the optimal value function follows from Theorem I.

As an alternative to using T' in policy evaluation, one can use the method of successive approximations (Kantorovich [19]). This procedure was used in Vandergraft [35] and Brumelle and Puterman [6), where it is shown that if (1 + T,) &gt; 0 then

We remark that we need not begin the policy iteration procedure by finding the return of a stationary policy To. From (9) we see that policy iteration is convergent if we begin the procedure in step (iii) with any vo. If Bo, #0 then the first iteration will not necessarily give an improvement; however, the sequence beginning from v, will be monotone nondecreasing.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges monotonically as k → o to an appropriate solution, un, of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

even when In is not invertible. Of course, when In is invertible, then In CT, = lim, Wink. It is also noted in (6] that policy improvement can be modified by setting Un = Wink, where k is an arbitrary nonnegative integer. This modification preserves the monotone convergence of {en) to the solution of Bo = 0 in [vo, y]. This modification could be quite useful from a computational point of view and has been further developed in the Markov decision context by Puterman and Shin [28] and more generally by Brumelle (5].

In the next theorem we state conditions that enable us to investigate the rate of convergence of the policy iteration procedure. It is based on Brumelle and Puterman's (6) generalization to nondifferentiable operators of the results of Vandergraft [35] on the rate of convergence of (5) for order-convex operators which are twice uniformly differentiable.

THEOREM 4. Suppose that V is a partially ordered normed linear space with constant 1, that (On)Ç V is a nondecreasing sequence satisfying (5), that {en} converges 10 0* with Bi* = 0, that for some p &gt; 0 there exists a constant K &lt; + 00 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and that there is a constant M such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then where L = IKM.

PROOF. Applying (6) at * implies that

From Theorem 1 together with (13) and the nonpositivity of Tu,' we have that

Taking norms and applying (10) and (11) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the language of numerical analysis (cf. Ortega and Rheinboldt (251) (Un) converges superlinearly to 0* if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following corollary is immediate from (14).

COROLLARY 1. If lim, -00|| To, - Tull = 0, then o, converges superlinearly to u*.

Condition (10) in Theorem 3 is too strong for most applications. Inspection of the proof of this theorem indicates that all that is essential is that (10) holds for 0 = un

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

and u = 0*. In $4 we provide an example in which the rate of convergence is that of (12) but (10) is not satisfied for all u, &amp; E V. In such situations the following corollary is applicable. It says that the hypothesis of Theorem 3 can be weakened to require only local Lipschitz continuity of T, at 2*.

COROLLARY 2. Suppose that the hypotheses of Theorem 3 are satisfied but (10) is replaced by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then (12) holds.

We now discuss how the rate of convergence results may be applied to Markov decision problems. The analysis is based on the following selection results that appear in Fleming and Rishel [13, p. 170]. Let g(a, v) be a real valued function defined for a in a compact, convex set A and for o in V, and let ga and gaa denote its first and second partial derivatives with respect to a.

LEMMA 1. If 8(a, v) is strictly concave in a for each o E V then there exists a continuous function a*(v) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all u EV.

LEMMA 2. Suppose that

- (ii) ga is Lipschitz continuous in v, and
- (i) g is twice continuously differentiable in a for each u EV.
- (iii) the eigenvalues of the matrices faa are bounded below by y &gt; 0.

Then a*(v) defined by (16) is Lipschitz continuous on V.

In the finite state Markov decision problem we define g by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and assume A is a compact and convex set. If c(s, a) is strictly concave in a for s E S. P(j|s, a) is continuous in a and p(j|s, a)u, is strictly concave in a for s and jES and (vo), &lt; 0; &lt; M/(I -1) then by Lemma I the action maximizing (17) is continuous in o for each s. In this case the hypothesis of Corollary l is satisfied and the convergence of policy iteration is superlinear. Note that if p(j|s, a) is affine in a, соло ван both conditions above on p are satisfied.

Next we derive a bound on the difference between U, and v*. This theorem is a special case of Theorem 4 of Brumelle and Puterman (6) and is based on the theory of nonlinear majorants due to Kantorovich [20] that appears in Ortega and Rheinboldt [25, pp. 405-415]. Before stating and proving this theorem we present the following useful lemma.

To obtain quadratic convergence for policy iteration, Lemma 2 and Theorem 4 imply that it is sufficient that p be affine in a, that c be twice differentiable in a, and that c satisfies condition (iii) of Lemma 2. In §4 we provide an example in which p is not affine; yet the results of Corollary 2 are applicable.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

PROOF. Applying (6) twice we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The result follows from subtracting Bu + Tu(t - u) from all three terms above. *

THEOREM 5. Suppose the hypotheses of Theorem 4 are satisfied and in addition that h = L/P||o, - voll &lt; 1. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for n = 1,2, ... where an= - (1 + p)"- (In h).

PROOF. Let u E V. Applying norms to (4) and using (18) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the last inequality following from (10) and (11). Choosing u = Un-, gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the real valued sequence {In; n = 0,1,2,...) by 10=0, 4, =110, - voll and In+1 - In = L(In -In-1)'+P for n = 2, 3,.... Hence by (20) we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or that (in) is a majorizing sequence for (On) (cf. [24, p. 414)). This implies that for т &gt; п,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following Ortega and Rheinboldt [24, pp. 409-410] we can pass to the limit and obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equality 1+1 - 14 = 1-1/Ph(1 + p)* together with (21) gives the first inequality in

To bound the sum, note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality follows by the change in variable o = - (In h)(1 + p)". · We note that the integral in (19) is tabulated in Spiegel [34).

i the olon In the following corollary the distance between the nth and (n - l)th iterates in (5) are used to determine a bound on the distance from the nth iterate to the zero of B. This result can be used to determine a stopping rule for the policy iteration procedure.

COROLLARY 3. Suppose the hypotheses of Theorem 5 are satisfied with h= L'Ple, - On ill &lt; 1. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4. An example. In this section we present an example to which this theory is applicable. In particular it shows that the weaker form of Theorem 4, Corollary 3, is appropriate for determining the rate of convergence of u, to *.

Let S = (0, 1) and A = [0, 1]. Choose c(0, a) = - a and c(1, a) = - 1 + a /12. The transition matrix corresponding to choosing action a in 0 and b in 1 is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The discount factor is denoted by 1. Bi is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 0 = (vo, Up).

From the discussion following Theorem 3 we know that the policy iteration procedure is convergent. We now investigate its rate of convergence. Denote by P, the transition matrix corresponding to the policy obtaining the maximum at o. In order to demonstrate quadratic convergence of policy iteration in this setting, it is sufficient to demonstrate the Lipschitz continuity of P.. We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

B i a to see deth - , is Lipshit io intinus us a ani hence by rollary 3. policy iteration converges quadratically. The following computational results for this problem with 1 = ½ illustrate this result.

| Iteration   | Policy                                      |                                                            | Bi                                              |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| WN-O        | (0, 0) (0. 1) (0, 0.5108399) (0, 0.5108399) | (-3, -1) (- 0.652482, - 1.304964) (- 0.652475, - 1.304951) | (0, 48) (0, 0.96974 × 10-5) (0,0.32313 × 10-19) |

5. Acknowledgement. We wish to express our thanks to E. V. Denardo and the editor, A. F. Veinott Jr., for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper.

## References

- [1] Bellman, R. (1955). Functional Equations in the Theory of Dynamic Programming V. Positivity and Quasilinearity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 41, 743-746.
2. (3] Blackwell, D. (1962). Discrete Dynamic Programming. Ann. Math. Statist. 35 719-726.
- [2] -. (1957). Dynamic Programming. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.
4. (4] —. (1965). Discounted Dynamic Programming. Ann. Math. Statist. 36 226-235.
- [6] - and Puterman, M. (1976). On the Convergence of Newton's Method for Operators with Supports. Working Paper No. 349. Faculty of Commerce, University of British Columbia.
- (5) Brumelle, S. (1977). Generalized Policy Improvement for Monotone Dynamic Programs. Working Paper 503. Faculty of Commerce, University of British Columbia.
7. [7) Denardo, E. (1967). Contraction Mappings in the Theory Underlying Dynamic Programming. SIAM
- [8] - and Miller, B. (1968). An Optimality Condition for Discrete Dynamic Programming with No Discounting. Ann. Math. Statist. 39 1220-1227.
9. (9] Dennis, J. E., Jr. (1970). Toward a Unified Convergence Theory for Newton-like Methods. Nonlinear Functional Analysis and Applications. L. B. Rall, ed. Academic Press, New York.
- (10) Derman, C. (1966). Denumerable State Markovian Decision Processes-Average Cost Criterion. Ann. Math. Statist. 37 1545-1554.

- [11] Doshi, B. (1976). Continuous Time Control of Markov Processes on an Arbitrary State Space; Discounted Rewards. Ann. Math. Statist. 4 1219-1235.
- [13] - and Rishel, R. (1975). Deterministic and Stochastic Optimal Control. Springer-Verlag, New York.
- [12] Fleming, W. (1963). Some Markovian Optimization Problems. J. Math. Mech. 12 131-140.
4. (14] Furukawa, N. (1972). Markovian Decision Processes with Compact Action Spaces. Ann. Math. Statist. 43 1612-1622.
5. (15] Gragg, W. B. and Tapia, R. A. (1974). Optimal Error Bounds for the Newton-Kantorovich Theorem. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 11 10-13.
- (16) Howard, R. (1960). Dynamic Programming and Markou Processes. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
7. [18) Kalaba, R. (1959). On Nonlinear Differential Equations, The Maximum Operation and Monotone Convergence. J. Math. Mech. 8519-574.
8. (17] Kakumanu, P. (1971). Continuously Discounted Markov Decision Model with Countable State and Action Space. Ann. Math. Statist. 42 916-926.
- [19] Kantorovich, L. V. (1939). The Method of Successive Approximations for Functional Equations. Acta. Math. 71 63-77.
10. [201 Kantorovich, L. G. and Akilov, G. P. (1964). Functional Analysis in Normed Spaces, Macmillan, New York.
- [21] Miller, B. L. (1968). Finite State Continuous Time Markov Decision Processes with an Infinite Planning Horizon. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 22 552-569.
- (22) - and Veinott, A. F., Jr. (1969). Discrete Dynamic Programming with a Small Interest Rate. Ann. Math. Statist. 40 366-370.
- [23] Ortega, J. M. (1968). The Newton-Kantorovich Theorem. Amer. Math. Monthly, 75 658-660.
- [25] - and · (1970). Iterative Solutions of Nonlinear Equations in Several Variables. Academic Press, New York.
- (24) - and Rheinboldt, W. C. (1967). Monotone Iterations for Nonlinear Equations with Applications to Gauss-Seidel Methods. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 4 171-190.
- [26] Pollatschek, M. and Avi-Itzhak, B. (1969). Algorithms for Stochastic Games with Geometrical Interpretation. Management Sci. 15 399-415.
17. (28] - and Shin, M. (1978). Modified Policy Iteration Algorithms for Discounted Markov Decision Problems. Management Sci. 24 1127-1137.
- [27] Puterman, M. (1977). Optimal Control of Diffusion Processes with Reflection. J. Optimization Theory Appl. 22 103-116.
- [29] Rall, L. B. (1974). A Note on the Convergence of Newton's Method. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 11 34 36.
- [30] Rheinboldt, W. C. (1968). A Unified Convergence Theory for a Class of Iterative Processes. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 5 42-63.
- [31] Rothblum, U. (1975). Normalized Markov Decision Chains I: Sensitive Discount Optimality. Operations Res. 23 785-795.
- [32] and Veinott, A. F., Jr. (1975). Cumulative Average Optimality for Normalized Markov Decision Chains. Draft version.
23. (33] Shapley, L. S. (1953). Stochastic Games. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 39 1095-1100.
- (34) Spiegel, M. R. (1968). Mathematical Handbook. McGraw-Hill, New York.
- [36] Veinott, A. F., Jr. (1966). On Finding Optimal Policies in Discrete Dynamic Programming with No Discounting. Ann. Math. Statist. 37 1284-1294.
26. (35] Vandergraft, J. S. (1967). Newton's Method for Convex Operators in Partially Ordered Spaces. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 4 406-432.
- (37) \_ (1969). Discrete Dynamic Programming with Sensitive Discount Optimality Criteria. Ann. Math. Statist. 40 1635-1660.
- [38] Wong, Y. C. and Ng, K. F. (1973). Partially Ordered Topological Vector Spaces. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

FACULTY OF COMMERCE, UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA, 2075 WESBROOK MALL, VANCOUVER, BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA VET IWS

<!-- image -->

Copyright 1979, by INFORMS, all rights reserved. Copyright of Mathematics of Operations Research is the property of INFORMS: Institute for Operations Research and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

<!-- image -->